WAR AND PEACE  By Leo TolstoyTolstoi  BOOK ONE 1805  CHAPTER I   "Well, Prince, s
o Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the Buonapartes. But I warn you,
 if you don't tell me that this means war, if you still try to defend the infamie
s and horrors perpetrated by that AntichristI really believe he is AntichristI wi
ll have nothing more to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my
 'faithful slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frighten
ed yousit down and tell me all the news."  It was in July, 1805, and the speaker 
was the wellknown Anna Pavlovna Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empres
s Marya Fedorovna. With these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of h
igh rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlo
vna had had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from la grippe
 grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by the elite.  All her
 invitations without exception, written in French, and delivered by a scarletlive
ried footman that morning, ran as follows  "If you have nothing better to do, Cou
nt or Prince, and if the prospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is n
ot too terrible, I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10Annet
te Scherer."  "Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the l
east disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing an embroidered 
court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars on his breast and a serene
 expression on his flat face. He spoke in that refined French in which our grandf
athers not only spoke but thought, and with the gentle, patronizing intonation na
tural to a man of importance who had grown old in society and at court. He went u
p to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shi
ning head, and complacently seated himself on the sofa.  "First of all, dear frie
nd, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mind at rest," said he without alterin
g his tone, beneath the politeness and affected sympathy of which indifference an
d even irony could be discerned.  "Can one be well while suffering morally? Can o
ne be calm in times like these if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You 
are staying the whole evening, I hope?"  "And the fete at the English ambassador'
s? Today is Wednesday. I must put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My d
aughter is coming for me to take me there."  "I thought today's fete had been can
celed. I confess all these festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."  "I
f they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have been put off," 
said the prince, who, like a woundup clock, by force of habit said things he did 
not even wish to be believed.  "Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided abou
t Novosiltsev's dispatch? You know everything."  "What can one say about it?" rep
lied the prince in a cold, listless tone. "What has been decided? They have decid
ed that Buonaparte has burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn o
urs."  Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stale part
. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years, overflowed with
 animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had become her social vocation 
and, sometimes even when she did not feel like it, she became enthusiastic in ord
er not to disappoint the expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile wh
ich, though it did not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expr
essed, as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect, w
hich she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, to correct.  In 
the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burst out  "Oh, do
n't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things, but Austria never 
has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is betraying us! Russia alone must sa
ve Europe. Our gracious sovereign recognizes his high vocation and will be true t
o it. That is the one thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has
 to perform the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God w
ill not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra of revoluti
on, which has become more terrible than ever in the person of this murderer and v
illain! We alone must avenge the blood of the just one.... Whom, I ask you, can w
e rely on?... England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot understand t
he Emperor Alexander's loftiness of soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She 
wanted to find, and still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer d
id Novosiltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannot understand t
he selfabnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for himself, but only desires 
the good of mankind. And what have they promised? Nothing! And what little they h
ave promised they will not perform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte i
s invincible, and that all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't believe
 a word that Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neutrality
 is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our adored mon
arch. He will save Europe!"  She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
  "I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sent instead of 
our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King of Prussia's consent by a
ssault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me a cup of tea?"  "In a moment. A pro
pos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expecting two very interesting men to
night, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is connected with the Montmorencys through th
e Rohans, one of the best French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the 
good ones. And also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has bee
n received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"  "I shall be delighted to meet them," 
said the prince. "But tell me," he added with studied carelessness as if it had o
nly just occurred to him, though the question he was about to ask was the chief m
otive of his visit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be 
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poor creature
."  Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were trying 
through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for the baron.  Anna Pav
lovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she nor anyone else had a r
ight to criticize what the Empress desired or was pleased with.  "Baron Funke has
 been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister," was all she said, in a d
ry and mournful tone.  As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly as
sumed an expression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled with sad
ness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious patroness. She a
dded that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup d'estime, and agai
n her face clouded over with sadness.  The prince was silent and looked indiffere
nt. But, with the womanly and courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, An
na Pavlovna wished both to rebuke him for daring to speak he had done of a man re
commended to the Empress and at the same time to console him, so she said  "Now a
bout your family. Do you know that since your daughter came out everyone has been
 enraptured by her? They say she is amazingly beautiful."  The prince bowed to si
gnify his respect and gratitude.  "I often think," she continued after a short pa
use, drawing nearer to the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that p
olitical and social topics were ended and the time had come for intimate conversa
tion"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are distributed. Why h
as fate given you two such splendid children? I don't speak of Anatole, your youn
gest. I don't like him," she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raisin
g her eyebrows. "Two such charming children. And really you appreciate them less 
than anyone, and so you don't deserve to have them."  And she smiled her ecstatic
 smile.  "I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack the 
bump of paternity."  "Don't joke I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you k
now I am dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" and her face assu
med its melancholy expression, "he was mentioned at Her Majesty's and you were pi
tied...."  The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly, awai
ting a reply. He frowned.  "What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You kno
w I did all a father could for their education, and they have both turned out foo
ls. Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. That is the
 only difference between them." He said this smiling in a way more natural and an
imated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth very clearly revealed som
ething unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.  "And why are children born to such me
n as you? If you were not a father there would be nothing I could reproach you wi
th," said Anna Pavlovna, looking up pensively.  "I am your faithful slave and to 
you alone I can confess that my children are the bane of my life. It is the cross
 I have to bear. That is how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"  He sai
d no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by a gesture. Anna Pavlovn
a meditated.  "Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" she
 asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though I don't feel
 that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who is very unhappy with 
her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess Mary Bolkonskaya."  Prince Vasil
i did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory and perception befitting a 
man of the world, he indicated by a movement of the head that he was considering 
this information.  "Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the 
sad current of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousand rubles a 
year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in five years, if he goes 
on like this?" Presently he added "That's what we fathers have to put up with....
 Is this princess of yours rich?"  "Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives 
in the country. He is the wellknown Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the a
rmy under the late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is very c
lever but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has a brother
 I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is an aidedecamp of Kutu
zov's and will be here tonight."  "Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, sudden
ly taking Anna Pavlovna's hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange
 that affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slaveslafe with an f,
 as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good family
 and that's all I want."  And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him
, he raised the maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and 
fro as he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.  "Attendez," sa
id Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, young Bolkonski's wife, this v
ery evening, and perhaps the thing can be arranged. It shall be on your family's 
behalf that I'll start my apprenticeship as old maid."      CHAPTER II   Anna Pav
lovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest Petersburg society was as
sembled there people differing widely in age and character but alike in the socia
l circle to which they belonged. Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, 
came to take her father to the ambassador's entertainment she wore a ball dress a
nd her badge as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as
 la femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg, * was also there. She had been marri
ed during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to any large gatheri
ngs, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son, Hippolyte, had come with 
Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morio and many others had also come.     
   * The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.   To each new arrival Anna Pavlovn
a said, "You have not yet seen my aunt," or "You do not know my aunt?" and very g
ravely conducted him or her to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in
 her cap, who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began t
o arrive and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovna 
mentioned each one's name and then left them.  Each visitor performed the ceremon
y of greeting this old aunt whom not one of them knew, not one of them wanted to 
know, and not one of them cared about Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with
 mournful and solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them
 in the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her Majesty
, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor, though politeness prevent
ed his showing impatience, left the old woman with a sense of relief at having pe
rformed a vexatious duty and did not return to her the whole evening.  The young 
Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a goldembroidered velvet bag. Her p
retty little upper lip, on which a delicate dark down was just perceptible, was t
oo short for her teeth, but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially ch
arming when she occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the
 case with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defectthe shortness of her upper li
p and her halfopen mouthseemed to be her own special and peculiar form of beauty.
 Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty young woman, so soon to become a
 mother, so full of life and health, and carrying her burden so lightly. Old men 
and dull dispirited young ones who looked at her, after being in her company and 
talking to her a little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full 
of life and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile 
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a specially 
amiable mood that day.  The little princess went round the table with quick, shor
t, swaying steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat d
own on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a pleasure to 
herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work," said she in French, disp
laying her bag and addressing all present. "Mind, Annette, I hope you have not pl
ayed a wicked trick on me," she added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it
 was to be quite a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she
 spread out her arms to show her shortwaisted, lacetrimmed, dainty gray dress, gi
rdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.  "Soyez tranquille, Lise, you wi
ll always be prettier than anyone else," replied Anna Pavlovna.  "You know," said
 the princess in the same tone of voice and still in French, turning to a general
, "my husband is deserting me? He is going to get himself killed. Tell me what th
is wretched war is for?" she added, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting
 for an answer she turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.  "What 
a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili to Anna Pavlovna.
  One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with closecropped
 hair, spectacles, the lightcolored breeches fashionable at that time, a very hig
h ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout young man was an illegitimate son of
 Count Bezukhov, a wellknown grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Mos
cow. The young man had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as h
e had only just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
 first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod she accorded
 to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of this lowestgrade gr
eeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight of something too large and un
suited to the place, came over her face when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was 
certainly rather bigger than the other men in the room, her anxiety could only ha
ve reference to the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression whic
h distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.  "It is very good of
 you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor invalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exc
hanging an alarmed glance with her aunt as she conducted him to her.  Pierre murm
ured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as if in search of som
ething. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little princess with a pleased smi
le, as to an intimate acquaintance.  Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pie
rre turned away from the aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majest
y's health. Anna Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words "Do you know the 
Abbe Morio? He is a most interesting man."  "Yes, I have heard of his scheme for 
perpetual peace, and it is very interesting but hardly feasible."  "You think so?
" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and get away to attend to her 
duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed a reverse act of impoliteness. First 
he had left a lady before she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued 
to speak to another who wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet 
spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimer
ical.  "We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.  And having g
ot rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she resumed her duties a
s hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready to help at any point where the
 conversation might happen to flag. As the foreman of a spinning mill, when he ha
s set the hands to work, goes round and notices here a spindle that has stopped o
r there one that creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check 
the machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her drawing 
room, approaching now a silent, now a toonoisy group, and by a word or slight rea
rrangement kept the conversational machine in steady, proper, and regular motion.
 But amid these cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious w
atch on him when he approached the group round Mortemart to listen to what was be
ing said there, and again when he passed to another group whose center was the ab
be.  Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna's was t
he first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all the intellectual lights of P
etersburg were gathered there and, like a child in a toyshop, did not know which 
way to look, afraid of missing any clever conversation that was to be heard. Seei
ng the selfconfident and refined expression on the faces of those present he was 
always expecting to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio. He
re the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunity to
 express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.      CHAPTER III   Ann
a Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed steadily and ceasel
essly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt, beside whom sat only one elde
rly lady, who with her thin careworn face was rather out of place in this brillia
nt society, the whole company had settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculi
ne, had formed round the abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the be
autiful Princess Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little Princess Bolkon
skaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age. The third group
 was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.  The vicomte was a nicelooking y
oung man with soft features and polished manners, who evidently considered himsel
f a celebrity but out of politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of th
e circle in which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as
 a treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a specially choic
e delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in the kitchen would have 
cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to her guests, first the vicomte and the
n the abbe, as peculiarly choice morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately b
egan discussing the murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'
Enghien had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular reaso
ns for Buonaparte's hatred of him.  "Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," 
said Anna Pavlovna, with a pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis X
V in the sound of that sentence "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."  The vicomte bowed a
nd smiled courteously in token of his willingness to comply. Anna Pavlovna arrang
ed a group round him, inviting everyone to listen to his tale.  "The vicomte knew
 the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to of the guests. "The vicomte is a
 wonderful raconteur," said she to another. "How evidently he belongs to the best
 society," said she to a third and the vicomte was served up to the company in th
e choicest and most advantageous style, like a wellgarnished joint of roast beef 
on a hot dish.  The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.  "
Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautiful young princess
 who was sitting some way off, the center of another group.  The princess smiled.
 She rose with the same unchanging smile with which she had first entered the roo
mthe smile of a perfectly beautiful woman. With a slight rustle of her white dres
s trimmed with moss and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sp
arkling diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking at
 any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the privilege of 
admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders, back, and bosomwhich in the 
fashion of those days were very much exposedand she seemed to bring the glamour o
f a ballroom with her as she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely tha
t not only did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even a
ppeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She seemed to wi
sh, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.  "How lovely!" said everyone who sa
w her and the vicomte lifted his shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by
 something extraordinary when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also
 with her unchanging smile.  "Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience,
" said he, smilingly inclining his head.  The princess rested her bare round arm 
on a little table and considered a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All t
he time the story was being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful r
ound arm, altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more be
autiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time to time she 
smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story produced an effect she gl
anced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted just the expression she saw on the maid o
f honor's face, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.  The little princess h
ad also left the tea table and followed Helene.  "Wait a moment, I'll get my work
.... Now then, what are you thinking of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyt
e. "Fetch me my workbag."  There was a general movement as the princess, smiling 
and talking merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in h
er seat.  "Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she to
ok up her work.  Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle 
and moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.  Le charmant Hippolyt
e was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister, but ye
t more by the fact that in spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His
 features were like his sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by 
a joyous, selfsatisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the wo
nderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary was dulled by imbe
cility and a constant expression of sullen selfconfidence, while his body was thi
n and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied 
grimace, and his arms and legs always fell into unnatural positions.  "It's not g
oing to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside the princess and hastily 
adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this instrument he could not begin to spea
k.  "Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging his shoulde
rs.  "Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone which showed
 that he only understood the meaning of his words after he had uttered them.  He 
spoke with such selfconfidence that his hearers could not be sure whether what he
 said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in a darkgreen dress coat, kn
ee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe effrayee, as he called it, shoes, an
d silk stockings.  The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, the
n current, to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to vis
it Mademoiselle George that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who also enjoyed
 the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleon happened to fall i
nto one of the fainting fits to which he was subject, and was thus at the duc's m
ercy. The latter spared him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid b
y death.  The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point wher
e the rivals suddenly recognized one another and the ladies looked agitated.  "Ch
arming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the little princess.  "Ch
arming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her work as if t
o testify that the interest and fascination of the story prevented her from going
 on with it.  The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully p
repared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a watchful eye on 
the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was talking too loudly and vehe
mently with the abbe, so she hurried to the rescue. Pierre had managed to start a
 conversation with the abbe about the balance of power, and the latter, evidently
 interested by the young man's simpleminded eagerness, was explaining his pet the
ory. Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why
 Anna Pavlovna disapproved.  "The means are... the balance of power in Europe and
 the rights of the people," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one po
werful nation like Russiabarbaric as she is said to beto place herself disinteres
tedly at the head of an alliance having for its object the maintenance of the bal
ance of power of Europe, and it would save the world!"  "But how are you to get t
hat balance?" Pierre was beginning.  At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, lo
oking severely at Pierre, asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Ita
lian's face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary express
ion, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.  "I am so enchanted by
 the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the society, more especially of the fem
inine society, in which I have had the honor of being received, that I have not y
et had time to think of the climate," said he.  Not letting the abbe and Pierre e
scape, Anna Pavlovna, the more conveniently to keep them under observation, broug
ht them into the larger circle.      CHAPTER IV   Just then another visitor enter
ed the drawing room Prince Andrew Bolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was
 a very handsome young man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Every
thing about him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step, of
fered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was evident that he 
not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had found them to be so tiresome 
that it wearied him to look at or listen to them. And among all these faces that 
he found so tedious, none seemed to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. 
He turned away from her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed A
nna Pavlovna's hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.  "You ar
e off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.  "General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski
, speaking French and stressing the last syllable of the general's name like a Fr
enchman, "has been pleased to take me as an aidedecamp...."  "And Lise, your wife
?"  "She will go to the country."  "Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your cha
rming wife?"  "Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquetti
sh manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling us such 
a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"  Prince Andrew screwed up his e
yes and turned away. Pierre, who from the moment Prince Andrew entered the room h
ad watched him with glad, affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before
 he looked round Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoev
er was touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him an une
xpectedly kind and pleasant smile.  "There now!... So you, too, are in the great 
world?" said he to Pierre.  "I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will c
ome to supper with you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the 
vicomte who was continuing his story.  "No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laug
hing and pressing Pierre's hand to show that there was no need to ask the questio
n. He wished to say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daug
hter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.  "You must excuse 
me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman, holding him down by the s
leeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising. "This unfortunate fete at the amba
ssador's deprives me of a pleasure, and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very so
rry to leave your enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.  His daug
hter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightly holding up the folds of
 her dress, and the smile shone still more radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierr
e gazed at her with rapturous, almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.  "Very 
lovely," said Prince Andrew.  "Very," said Pierre.  In passing Prince Vasili seiz
ed Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna "Educate this bear for me! He has been
 staying with me a whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in soci
ety. Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever women."  An
na Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his father to be
 a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who had been sitting with the 
old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasili in the anteroom. All the affec
tation of interest she had assumed had left her kindly and tearworn face and it n
ow expressed only anxiety and fear.  "How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, 
hurrying after him into the anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. T
ell me what news I may take back to my poor boy."  Although Prince Vasili listene
d reluctantly and not very politely to the elderly lady, even betraying some impa
tience, she gave him an ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that 
he might not go away.  "What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and 
then he would be transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.  "Believe me, Prin
cess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince Vasili, "but it is difficult f
or me to ask the Emperor. I should advise you to appeal to Rumyantsev through Pri
nce Golitsyn. That would be the best way."  The elderly lady was a Princess Drube
tskaya, belonging to one of the best families in Russia, but she was poor, and ha
ving long been out of society had lost her former influential connections. She ha
d now come to Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son
. It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained an invitati
on to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listening to the vicomte's story. Pri
nce Vasili's words frightened her, an embittered look clouded her once handsome f
ace, but only for a moment then she smiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm
 more tightly.  "Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you for
 anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my father's fri
endship for you but now I entreat you for God's sake to do this for my sonand I s
hall always regard you as a benefactor," she added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry
, but promise! I have asked Golitsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man y
ou always were," she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.  "Papa,
 we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautiful head and looking 
over her classically molded shoulder as she stood waiting by the door.  Influence
 in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized if it is to last. P
rince Vasili knew this, and having once realized that if he asked on behalf of al
l who begged of him, he would soon be unable to ask for himself, he became chary 
of using his influence. But in Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her sec
ond appeal, something like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was
 quite true he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.
 Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those womenmostly moth
erswho, having once made up their minds, will not rest until they have gained the
ir end, and are prepared if necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour a
fter hour, and even to make scenes. This last consideration moved him.  "My dear 
Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and weariness of tone, "it 
is almost impossible for me to do what you ask but to prove my devotion to you an
d how I respect your father's memory, I will do the impossibleyour son shall be t
ransferred to the Guards. Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"  "My dear be
nefactor! This is what I expected from youI knew your kindness!" He turned to go.
  "Waitjust a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..." she faltered. 
"You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov... recommend Boris to hi
m as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, and then..."  Prince Vasili smiled.  "No,
 I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since his appointme
nt as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the Moscow ladies have cons
pired to give him all their sons as adjutants."  "No, but do promise! I won't let
 you go! My dear benefactor..."  "Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same 
tone as before, "we shall be late."  "Well, au revoir! Goodby! You hear her?"  "T
hen tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"  "Certainly but about Kutuzov, I don
't promise."  "Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went
, with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably came naturally 
to her, but was now very illsuited to her careworn face.  Apparently she had forg
otten her age and by force of habit employed all the old feminine arts. But as so
on as the prince had gone her face resumed its former cold, artificial expression
. She returned to the group where the vicomte was still talking, and again preten
ded to listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was accompl
ished.      CHAPTER V   "And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronat
ion at Milan?" asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and
 Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur Buonaparte
 sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the nations? Adorable! It is e
nough to make one's head whirl! It is as if the whole world had gone crazy."  Pri
nce Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic smile.  "'D
ieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine when he said 
that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian "'Dio mi l'ha dato. Guai a chi
 la tocchi!'"        * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!   "
I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run over," Anna Pav
lovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able to endure this man who is a men
ace to everything."  "The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte
, polite but hopeless "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XV
II, for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became more animated
. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayal of the Bourbon c
ause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadors to compliment the usurper
."  And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.  Prince Hippolyte, w
ho had been gazing at the vicomte for some time through his lorgnette, suddenly t
urned completely round toward the little princess, and having asked for a needle 
began tracing the Conde coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with 
as much gravity as if she had asked him to do it.  "Baton de gueules, engrele de 
gueules d'azurmaison Conde," said he.  The princess listened, smiling.  "If Buona
parte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the vicomte continued, with
 the air of a man who, in a matter with which he is better acquainted than anyone
 else, does not listen to others but follows the current of his own thoughts, "th
ings will have gone too far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, Frenc
h societyI mean good French societywill have been forever destroyed, and then..."
  He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to make a rem
ark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna, who had him under ob
servation, interrupted  "The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy wh
ich always accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declare
d that he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose their own form 
of government and I believe that once free from the usurper, the whole nation wil
l certainly throw itself into the arms of its rightful king," she concluded, tryi
ng to be amiable to the royalist emigrant.  "That is doubtful," said Prince Andre
w. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite rightly supposes that matters have already gone too
 far. I think it will be difficult to return to the old regime."  "From what I ha
ve heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the conversation, "almost all 
the aristocracy has already gone over to Bonaparte's side."  "It is the Buonapart
ists who say that," replied the vicomte without looking at Pierre. "At the presen
t time it is difficult to know the real state of French public opinion."  "Bonapa
rte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.  It was evident 
that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his remarks at him, though withou
t looking at him.  "'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,
'" Prince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words.
 "'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how far he was ju
stified in saying so."  "Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murde
r of the duc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some peo
ple," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero, after the murder
 of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one hero less on earth."  Bef
ore Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation of the vico
mte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, and though Anna Pavlovna
 felt sure he would say something inappropriate, she was unable to stop him.  "Th
e execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a political nec
essity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness of soul by not fearing 
to take on himself the whole responsibility of that deed."  "Dieu! Mon Dieu!" mut
tered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.  "What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you con
sider that assassination shows greatness of soul?" said the little princess, smil
ing and drawing her work nearer to her.  "Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.  "Ca
pital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee with the pa
lm of his hand.  The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnl
y at his audience over his spectacles and continued.  "I say so," he continued de
sperately, "because the Bourbons fled from the Revolution leaving the people to a
narchy, and Napoleon alone understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for t
he general good, he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."  "Won't
 you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.  But Pierre continue
d his speech without heeding her.  "No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, 
"Napoleon is great because he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abu
ses, preserved all that was good in itequality of citizenship and freedom of spee
ch and of the pressand only for that reason did he obtain power."  "Yes, if havin
g obtained power, without availing himself of it to commit murder he had restored
 it to the rightful king, I should have called him a great man," remarked the vic
omte.  "He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid th
em of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. The Revolution w
as a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by this desperate and pro
vocative proposition his extreme youth and his wish to express all that was in hi
s mind.  "What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But
 won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.  "Rousseau's Contra
t social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.  "I am not speaking of regicid
e, I am speaking about ideas."  "Yes ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," aga
in interjected an ironical voice.  "Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are n
ot what is most important. What is important are the rights of man, emancipation 
from prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has re
tained in full force."  "Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, 
as if at last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words wer
e, "highsounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not love libert
y and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality. Have people since
 the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We wanted liberty, but Buonapart
e has destroyed it."  Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre
 to the vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment of Pie
rre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, was horrorstruck. Bu
t when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had not exasperated the vicomte, 
and had convinced herself that it was impossible to stop him, she rallied her for
ces and joined the vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator.  "But, my dear Mon
sieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact of a great man executing a 
ducor even an ordinary man whois innocent and untried?"  "I should like," said th
e vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the 18th Brumaire was not that an impost
ure? It was a swindle, and not at all like the conduct of a great man!"  "And the
 prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the little princess, shr
ugging her shoulders.  "He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hi
ppolyte.  Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His 
smile was unlike the halfsmile of other people. When he smiled, his grave, even r
ather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by anothera childlike, kindly, ev
en rather silly look, which seemed to ask forgiveness.  The vicomte who was meeti
ng him for the first time saw clearly that this young Jacobin was not so terrible
 as his words suggested. All were silent.  "How do you expect him to answer you a
ll at once?" said Prince Andrew. "Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has 
to distinguish between his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an empe
ror. So it seems to me."  "Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the
 arrival of this reinforcement.  "One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that
 Napoleon as a man was great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaff
a where he gave his hand to the plaguestricken but... but there are other acts wh
ich it is difficult to justify."  Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone
 down the awkwardness of Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that 
it was time to go.  Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone
 to attend, and asking them all to be seated began  "I was told a charming Moscow
 story today and must treat you to it. Excuse me, VicomteI must tell it in Russia
n or the point will be lost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in 
such Russian as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia. Ev
eryone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their attention to his s
tory.  "There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She must hav
e two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was her taste. And she
 had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."  Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evident
ly collecting his ideas with difficulty.  "She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' 
to the maid, 'put on a livery, get up behind the carriage, and come with me while
 I make some calls.'"  Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing lo
ng before his audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Sev
eral persons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did however smile.  
"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat and her long ha
ir came down...." Here he could contain himself no longer and went on, between ga
sps of laughter "And the whole world knew...."  And so the anecdote ended. Though
 it was unintelligible why he had told it, or why it had to be told in Russian, s
till Anna Pavlovna and the others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in s
o agreeably ending Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote
 the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and next 
balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when and where.      CHAPT
ER VI   Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began to
 take their leave.  Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, 
with huge red hands he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing roo
m and still less how to leave one that is, how to say something particularly agre
eable before going away. Besides this he was absentminded. When he rose to go, he
 took up instead of his own, the general's threecornered hat, and held it, pullin
g at the plume, till the general asked him to restore it. All his absentmindednes
s and inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by his 
kindly, simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and, with 
a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion, nodded and s
aid "I hope to see you again, but I also hope you will change your opinions, my d
ear Monsieur Pierre."  When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but a
gain everybody saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are o
pinions, but you see what a capital, goodnatured fellow I am." And everyone, incl
uding Anna Pavlovna, felt this.  Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, t
urning his shoulders to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listen
ed indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also come in
to the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant princess, and s
tared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.  "Go in, Annette, or you will catch co
ld," said the little princess, taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," sh
e added in a low voice.  Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about
 the match she contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sisterinlaw.
  "I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Write to her
 and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au revoir!"and she left the 
hall.  Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face clos
e to her, began to whisper something.  Two footmen, the princess' and his own, st
ood holding a shawl and a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They lis
tened to the French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of unde
rstanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual spoke smiling
ly and listened with a laugh.  "I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's,"
 said Prince Hippolyte "so dull. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? De
lightful!"  "They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing 
up her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there."  "Not a
ll, for you will not be there not all," said Prince Hippolyte smiling joyfully an
d snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he even pushed aside, he began wrapp
ing it round the princess. Either from awkwardness or intentionally no one could 
have said which after the shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for 
a long time, as though embracing her.  Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, 
turning and glancing at her husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary a
nd sleepy did he seem.  "Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.  Pr
ince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion reached to
 his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch following the princ
ess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.  "Princesse, au revoir," cried
 he, stumbling with his tongue as well as with his feet.  The princess, picking u
p her dress, was taking her seat in the dark carriage, her husband was adjusting 
his saber Prince Hippolyte, under pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.  "A
llow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeable tone to Prin
ce Hippolyte who was blocking his path.  "I am expecting you, Pierre," said the s
ame voice, but gently and affectionately.  The postilion started, the carriage wh
eels rattled. Prince Hippolyte laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch wai
ting for the vicomte whom he had promised to take home.  "Well, mon cher," said t
he vicomte, having seated himself beside Hippolyte in the carriage, "your little 
princess is very nice, very nice indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of
 his fingers. Hippolyte burst out laughing.  "Do you know, you are a terrible cha
p for all your innocent airs," continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, t
hat little officer who gives himself the airs of a monarch."  Hippolyte spluttere
d again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were saying that the Russian ladies
 are not equal to the French? One has to know how to deal with them."   Pierre re
aching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like one quite at home, an
d from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took from the shelf the first book
 that came to his hand it was Caesar's Commentaries, and resting on his elbow, be
gan reading it in the middle.  "What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be q
uite ill now," said Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small whi
te hands.  Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eag
er face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.  "That abbe is very interes
ting but he does not see the thing in the right light.... In my opinion perpetual
 peace is possible butI do not know how to express it... not by a balance of poli
tical power...."  It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such ab
stract conversation.  "One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, h
ave you at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a diploma
tist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.  Pierre sat up on the sofa,
 with his legs tucked under him.  "Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either 
the one or the other."  "But you must decide on something! Your father expects it
."  Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor, and had 
remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow his father dismissed
 the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go to Petersburg, look round, and choos
e your profession. I will agree to anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, a
nd here is money. Write to me all about it, and I will help you in everything." P
ierre had already been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided on
 anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking. Pierre rubbe
d his forehead.  "But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe who
m he had met that evening.  "That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupt
ed him, "let us talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"  "No, I have n
ot but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to tell you. There is a war n
ow against Napoleon. If it were a war for freedom I could understand it and shoul
d be the first to enter the army but to help England and Austria against the grea
test man in the world is not right."  Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders a
t Pierre's childish words. He put on the air of one who finds it impossible to re
ply to such nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other 
answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.  "If no one fought
 except on his own conviction, there would be no wars," he said.  "And that would
 be splendid," said Pierre.  Prince Andrew smiled ironically.  "Very likely it wo
uld be splendid, but it will never come about..."  "Well, why are you going to th
e war?" asked Pierre.  "What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..
." He paused. "I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"  
    CHAPTER VII   The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Princ
e Andrew shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had had 
in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa. The princ
ess came in. She had changed her gown for a house dress as fresh and elegant as t
he other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a chair for her.  "How is it," s
he began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and fussily in the easy chair
, "how is it Annette never got married? How stupid you men all are not to have ma
rried her! Excuse me for saying so, but you have no sense about women. What an ar
gumentative fellow you are, Monsieur Pierre!"  "And I am still arguing with your 
husband. I can't understand why he wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addre
ssing the princess with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men 
in their intercourse with young women.  The princess started. Evidently Pierre's 
words touched her to the quick.  "Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I
 don't understand it I don't in the least understand why men can't live without w
ars. How is it that we women don't want anything of the kind, don't need it? Now 
you shall judge between us. I always tell him Here he is Uncle's aidedecamp, a mo
st brilliant position. He is so well known, so much appreciated by everyone. The 
other day at the Apraksins' I heard a lady asking, 'Is that the famous Prince And
rew?' I did indeed." She laughed. "He is so well received everywhere. He might ea
sily become aidedecamp to the Emperor. You know the Emperor spoke to him most gra
ciously. Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"  P
ierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the conversation, g
ave no reply.  "When are you starting?" he asked.  "Oh, don't speak of his going,
 don't! I won't hear it spoken of," said the princess in the same petulantly play
ful tone in which she had spoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was s
o plainly illsuited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member. "To
day when I remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off..
. and then you know, Andre..." she looked significantly at her husband "I'm afrai
d, I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down her back.  Her husband look
ed at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides Pierre and himself was i
n the room, and addressed her in a tone of frigid politeness.  "What is it you ar
e afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.  "There, what egotists men all a
re all, all egotists! Just for a whim of his own, goodness only knows why, he lea
ves me and locks me up alone in the country."  "With my father and sister, rememb
er," said Prince Andrew gently.  "Alone all the same, without my friends.... And 
he expects me not to be afraid."  Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up
, giving her not a joyful, but an animal, squirrellike expression. She paused as 
if she felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the gis
t of the matter lay in that.  "I still can't understand what you are afraid of," 
said Prince Andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.  The princess blushe
d, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.  "No, Andrew, I must say you ha
ve changed. Oh, how you have..."  "Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," s
aid Prince Andrew. "You had better go."  The princess said nothing, but suddenly 
her short downy lip quivered. Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and wal
ked about the room.  Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now a
t him and now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.  "Why 
should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little princess suddenly
, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful grimace. "I have long wanted
 to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed so to me? What have I done to you? You 
are going to the war and have no pity for me. Why is it?"  "Lise!" was all Prince
 Andrew said. But that one word expressed an entreaty, a threat, and above all co
nviction that she would herself regret her words. But she went on hurriedly  "You
 treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave like that six 
months ago?"  "Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatic
ally.  Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to all 
this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the sight of tea
rs and was ready to cry himself.  "Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you be
cause... I assure you I myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excus
e me! An outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself... Goodby!"
  Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.  "No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too k
ind to wish to deprive me of the pleasure of spending the evening with you."  "No
, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without restraining her angry
 tears.  "Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch which i
ndicates that patience is exhausted.  Suddenly the angry, squirrellike expression
 of the princess' pretty face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. He
r beautiful eyes glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the t
imid, deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its droopin
g tail.  "Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one hand 
she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.  "Good night, Lise," s
aid he, rising and courteously kissing her hand as he would have done to a strang
er.      CHAPTER VIII   The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. 
Pierre continually glanced at Prince Andrew Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead wit
h his small hand.  "Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the
 door.  They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room. Eve
rything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore that imprint 
of newness found in the households of the newly married. Halfway through supper P
rince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and, with a look of nervous agitation
 such as Pierre had never before seen on his face, began to talkas one who has lo
ng had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak out.  "Never, never
 marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice never marry till you can say to yourself
 that you have done all you are capable of, and until you have ceased to love the
 woman of your choice and have seen her plainly as she is, or else you will make 
a cruel and irrevocable mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothingor al
l that is good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles. Y
es! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you marry expecting anythin
g from yourself in the future, you will feel at every step that for you all is en
ded, all is closed except the drawing room, where you will be ranged side by side
 with a court lackey and an idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his a
rm.  Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and the g
oodnatured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend in amazement. 
 "My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those rare wo
men with whom a man's honor is safe but, O God, what would I not give now to be u
nmarried! You are the first and only one to whom I mention this, because I like y
ou."  As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who ha
d lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with halfclosed eyes had uttered Fren
ch phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his thin face was now quivering wit
h nervous excitement his eyes, in which the fire of life had seemed extinguished,
 now flashed with brilliant light. It was evident that the more lifeless he seeme
d at ordinary times, the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost mo
rbid irritation.  "You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is
 the whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he though P
ierre had not mentioned Bonaparte, "but Bonaparte when he worked went step by ste
p toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing but his aim to consider, and he re
ached it. But tie yourself up with a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose 
all freedom! And all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and tor
ments you with regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and trivialitythese 
are the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war, the gre
atest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for nothing. I am very am
iable and have a caustic wit," continued Prince Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's t
hey listen to me. And that stupid set without whom my wife cannot exist, and thos
e women... If you only knew what those society women are, and women in general! M
y father is right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everythingthat's what women 
are when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it seem
s as if there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing, nothing! No, 
don't marry, my dear fellow don't marry!" concluded Prince Andrew.  "It seems fun
ny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consider yourself incapable and you
r life a spoiled life. You have everything before you, everything. And you..."  H
e did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he thought of his f
riend and how much he expected of him in the future.  "How can he talk like that?
" thought Pierre. He considered his friend a model of perfection because Prince A
ndrew possessed in the highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and 
which might be best described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished a
t Prince Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary memory, hi
s extensive reading he had read everything, knew everything, and had an opinion a
bout everything, but above all at his capacity for work and study. And if Pierre 
was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation to whi
ch he himself was particularly addicted, he regarded even this not as a defect bu
t as a sign of strength.  Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations 
of life, praise and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wh
eels that they may run smoothly.  "My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "W
hat's the use of talking about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silen
ce, smiling at his reassuring thoughts.  That smile was immediately reflected on 
Pierre's face.  "But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxi
ng into a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenly bl
ushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say this. "Wit
hout a name and without means... And it really..." But he did not say what "it re
ally" was. "For the present I am free and am all right. Only I haven't the least 
idea what I am to do I wanted to consult you seriously."  Prince Andrew looked ki
ndly at him, yet his glancefriendly and affectionate as it wasexpressed a sense o
f his own superiority.  "I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man
 among our whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will it's all the sa
me. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here give up visiting those Kuragins a
nd leading that sort of life. It suits you so badlyall this debauchery, dissipati
on, and the rest of it!"  "What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre,
 shrugging his shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow women!"  "I don't understand it,
" replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme il faut, that's a different matter 
but the Kuragins' set of women, 'women and wine' I don't understand!"  Pierre was
 staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipated life of his son An
atole, the son whom they were planning to reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew
's sister.  "Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought,
 "seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such a life I can't deci
de or think properly about anything. One's head aches, and one spends all one's m
oney. He asked me for tonight, but I won't go."  "You give me your word of honor 
not to go?"  "On my honor!"      CHAPTER IX   It was past one o'clock when Pierre
 left his friend. It was a cloudless, northern, summer night. Pierre took an open
 cab intending to drive straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the mo
re he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light enou
gh to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning or ev
ening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin was expecting
 the usual set for cards that evening, after which there was generally a drinking
 bout, finishing with visits of a kind Pierre was very fond of.  "I should like t
o go to Kuragin's," thought he.  But he immediately recalled his promise to Princ
e Andrew not to go there. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desire
d so passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to tha
t he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that his promise to P
rince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it he had already promised
 Prince Anatole to come to his gathering "besides," thought he, "all such 'words 
of honor' are conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if one con
siders that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something so extraordinary may happen
 to one that honor and dishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often indulged in r
eflections of this sort, nullifying all his decisions and intentions. He went to 
Kuragin's.  Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which An
atole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs, and went in a
t the open door. There was no one in the anteroom empty bottles, cloaks, and over
shoes were lying about there was a smell of alcohol, and sounds of voices and sho
uting in the distance.  Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet 
dispersed. Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were t
he remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking on the sly
 what was left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds of laughter, the s
houting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and general commotion. Some e
ight or nine young men were crowding anxiously round an open window. Three others
 were romping with a young bear, one pulling him by the chain and trying to set h
im at the others.  "I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.  "Mind, no holding 
on!" cried another.  "I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our h
ands."  "There, leave Bruin alone here's a bet on."  "At one draught, or he loses
!" shouted a fourth.  "Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome
 fellow who stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine li
nen shirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is Petya! Good m
an!" cried he, addressing Pierre.  Another voice, from a man of medium height wit
h clear blue eyes, particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its so
ber ring, cried from the window "Come here part the bets!" This was Dolokhov, an 
officer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler and duelist, who was living 
with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him merrily.  "I don't understand. Wha
t's it all about?"  "Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatol
e, taking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre.  "First of all you must dr
ink!"  Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows at the 
tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listening to their cha
tter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass while explaining that Dolokhov was
 betting with Stevens, an English naval officer, that he would drink a bottle of 
rum sitting on the outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging ou
t.  "Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the last glass, "
or I won't let you go!"  "No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and h
e went up to the window.  Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly 
and distinctly repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly to
 Anatole and Pierre.  Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and lightblu
e eyes. He was about twentyfive. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache, 
so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearly seen. The l
ines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middle of the upper lip for
med a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm lower one, and something like two
 distinct smiles played continually round the two corners of the mouth this, toge
ther with the resolute, insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect whi
ch made it impossible not to notice his face. Dolokhov was a man of small means a
nd no connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles, Dolokho
v lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them,
 including Anatole himself, respected him more than they did Anatole. Dolokhov co
uld play all games and nearly always won. However much he drank, he never lost hi
s clearheadedness. Both Kuragin and Dolokhov were at that time notorious among th
e rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg.  The bottle of rum was brought. The window
 frame which prevented anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out
 by two footmen, who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions an
d shouts of the gentlemen around.  Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to t
he window. He wanted to smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at th
e frame, but could not move it. He smashed a pane.  "You have a try, Hercules," s
aid he, turning to Pierre.  Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the
 oak frame out with a crash.  "Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on
," said Dolokhov.  "Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Ana
tole.  "Firstrate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rum in
 his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky, the dawn m
erging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.  Dolokhov, the bottle of rum st
ill in his hand, jumped onto the window sill. "Listen!" cried he, standing there 
and addressing those in the room. All were silent.  "I bet fifty imperials"he spo
ke French that the Englishman might understand him, but he did, not speak it very
 well"I bet fifty imperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he, ad
dressing the Englishman.  "No, fifty," replied the latter.  "All right. Fifty imp
erials... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum without taking it from my mouth
, sitting outside the window on this spot" he stooped and pointed to the sloping 
ledge outside the window "and without holding on to anything. Is that right?"  "Q
uite right," said the Englishman.  Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking hi
m by one of the buttons of his coat and looking down at himthe Englishman was sho
rtbegan repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.  "Wait!" cried Dolokh
ov, hammering with the bottle on the window sill to attract attention. "Wait a bi
t, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else does the same, I will pay him a hundred imperi
als. Do you understand?"  The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether h
e intended to accept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and thou
gh he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translating Dolokh
ov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the Life Guards, who had 
been losing that evening, climbed on the window sill, leaned over, and looked dow
n.  "Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the stones of the 
pavement.  "Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The lad j
umped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.  Placing the bottle 
on the window sill where he could reach it easily, Dolokhov climbed carefully and
 slowly through the window and lowered his legs. Pressing against both sides of t
he window, he adjusted himself on his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to 
the right and then to the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought two candl
es and placed them on the window sill, though it was already quite light. Dolokho
v's back in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit up from both sides. Eve
ryone crowded to the window, the Englishman in front. Pierre stood smiling but si
lent. One man, older than the others present, suddenly pushed forward with a scar
ed and angry look and wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov's shirt.  "I say, this is 
folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.  Anatole stopped him.  "Don
't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed. Eh?... What then?... E
h?"  Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arranged himsel
f on his seat.  "If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words sep
arately through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there. Now then!
"  Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottle and lift
ed it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free hand to balance himse
lf. One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some broken glass remained in t
hat position without taking his eyes from the window and from Dolokhov's back. An
atole stood erect with staring eyes. The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing u
p his lips. The man who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room
 and threw himself on a sofa with his face to the wall. Pierre hid his face, from
 which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror and 
fear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov still sat in 
the same position, only his head was thrown further back till his curly hair touc
hed his shirt collar, and the hand holding the bottle was lifted higher and highe
r and trembled with the effort. The bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising st
ill higher and his head tilting yet further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pi
erre. It seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov
 made a backward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously this was
 sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping ledge. As he
 began slipping down, his head and arm wavered still more with the strain. One ha
nd moved as if to clutch the window sill, but refrained from touching it. Pierre 
again covered his eyes and thought he would never open them again. Suddenly he wa
s aware of a stir all around. He looked up Dolokhov was standing on the window si
ll, with a pale but radiant face.  "It's empty."  He threw the bottle to the Engl
ishman, who caught it neatly. Dolokhov jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.  "W
ell done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil take you!" came from
 different sides.  The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the m
oney. Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the window si
ll.  "Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" he suddenly 
cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me a bottle. I'll do it....
 Bring a bottle!"  "Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.  "What
 next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you go giddy even on a
 staircase," exclaimed several voices.  "I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of ru
m!" shouted Pierre, banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and p
reparing to climb out of the window.  They seized him by his arms but he was so s
trong that everyone who touched him was sent flying.  "No, you'll never manage hi
m that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit and I'll get round him.... Listen! I'll ta
ke your bet tomorrow, but now we are all going to 's."  "Come on then," cried Pie
rre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin with us."  And he caught the bear, took it
 in his arms, lifted it from the ground, and began dancing round the room with it
.      CHAPTER X   Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubet
skaya who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evening of Ann
a Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exception made, 
and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with the rank of cornet
. He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staff despite all Anna Mikhay
lovna's endeavors and entreaties. Soon after Anna Pavlovna's reception Anna Mikha
ylovna returned to Moscow and went straight to her rich relations, the Rostovs, w
ith whom she stayed when in the town and where her darling Bory, who had only jus
t entered a regiment of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards 
as a cornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a time. The 
Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August, and her son, who had r
emained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join them on the march to Radzivilov.
  It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovsthe mother and t
he youngest daughterboth named Nataly. Ever since the morning, carriages with six
 horses had been coming and going continually, bringing visitors to the Countess 
Rostova's big house on the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess 
herself and her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawingroom with the visitor
s who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in relays.  
The countess was a woman of about fortyfive, with a thin Oriental type of face, e
vidently worn out with childbearingshe had had twelve. A languor of motion and sp
eech, resulting from weakness, gave her a distinguished air which inspired respec
t. Princess Anna Mikhaylovna Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was al
so seated in the drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The 
young people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to take
 part in receiving the visitors. The count met the guests and saw them off, invit
ing them all to dinner.  "I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma cher
e"he called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his
 tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in rank"I thank you for my
self and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping. But mind you come t
o dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On behalf of the whole family I beg yo
u to come, mon cher!" These words he repeated to everyone without exception or va
riation, and with the same expression on his full, cheerful, cleanshaven face, th
e same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As soon as he
 had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the drawing
 room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily spreading out his legs and pu
tting his hands on his knees with the air of a man who enjoys life and knows how 
to live, he swayed to and fro with dignity, offered surmises about the weather, o
r touched on questions of health, sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad 
but selfconfident French then again, like a man weary but unflinching in the fulf
illment of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray h
airs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his way back fr
om the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and pantry into the large 
marble dining hall, where tables were being set out for eighty people and looking
 at the footmen, who were bringing in silver and china, moving tables, and unfold
ing damask table linen, he would call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and
 the manager of all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous 
table would say "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they should be? 
That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it." And with a complacent s
igh he would return to the drawing room.  "Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter
!" announced the countess' gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawi
ng room. The countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox wi
th her husband's portrait on it.  "I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, 
I'll see her and no more. She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footma
n in a sad voice, as if saying "Very well, finish me off."  A tall, stout, and pr
oudlooking woman, with a roundfaced smiling daughter, entered the drawing room, t
heir dresses rustling.  "Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor
 child... at the Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was so delighte
d..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices, interrupting one another and m
ingling with the rustling of dresses and the scraping of chairs. Then one of thos
e conversations began which last out until, at the first pause, the guests rise w
ith a rustle of dresses and say, "I am so delighted... Mamma's health... and Coun
tess Apraksina..." and then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put on cloak
s or mantles, and drive away. The conversation was on the chief topic of the day 
the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count Bezukhov
, and about his illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at
 Anna Pavlovna's reception.  "I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor
. "He is in such bad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kil
l him!"  "What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the visit
or alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of Count Bezukhov's d
istress some fifteen times.  "That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed
 the visitor. "It seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do
 as he liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible things tha
t he has been expelled by the police."  "You don't say so!" replied the countess.
  "He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Prince Vasili's son
, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up to heaven only knows what!
 And they have had to suffer for it. Dolokhov has been degraded to the ranks and 
Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow. Anatole Kuragin's father managed somehow to g
et his son's affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."  "But 
what have they been up to?" asked the countess.  "They are regular brigands, espe
cially Dolokhov," replied the visitor. "He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, 
such a worthy woman, but there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewh
ere, put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The polic
e tried to interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied a policeman and th
e bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal. And there was the bear
 swimming about with the policeman on his back!"  "What a nice figure the policem
an must have cut, my dear!" shouted the count, dying with laughter.  "Oh, how dre
adful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"  Yet the ladies themselves could not help
 laughing.  "It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the visi
tor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son who amuses himself in
 this sensible manner! And he was said to be so well educated and clever. This is
 all that his foreign education has done for him! I hope that here in Moscow no o
ne will receive him, in spite of his money. They wanted to introduce him to me, b
ut I quite declined I have my daughters to consider."  "Why do you say this young
 man is so rich?" asked the countess, turning away from the girls, who at once as
sumed an air of inattention. "His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre a
lso is illegitimate."  The visitor made a gesture with her hand.  "I should think
 he has a score of them."  Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversati
on, evidently wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in so
ciety.  "The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a half w
hisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost count of his chi
ldren, but this Pierre was his favorite."  "How handsome the old man still was on
ly a year ago!" remarked the countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."  "He 
is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I was saying, Prince 
Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but the count is very fond of Pierre, l
ooked after his education, and wrote to the Emperor about him so that in the case
 of his deathand he is so ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has 
come from Petersburgno one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre or 
Prince Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know it all very we
ll for Prince Vasili told me himself. Besides, Cyril Vladimirovich is my mother's
 second cousin. He's also my Bory's godfather," she added, as if she attached no 
importance at all to the fact.  "Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hea
r he has come on some inspection business," remarked the visitor.  "Yes, but betw
een ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext. The fact is he has come to
 see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearing how ill he is."  "But do you know, my dea
r, that was a capital joke," said the count and seeing that the elder visitor was
 not listening, he turned to the young ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny f
igure that policeman cut!"  And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman
, his portly form again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who alw
ays eats well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!" he 
said.      CHAPTER XI   Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smili
ng affably, but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they 
now rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already smoothing down 
her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when suddenly from the next room 
were heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to the door and the noise of a
 chair falling over, and a girl of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her
 short muslin frock, darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. It wa
s evident that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in
 the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer of the Gua
rds, a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosyfaced boy in a short jacket.  The count j
umped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide and threw them roun
d the little girl who had run in.  "Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My 
pet, whose name day it is. My dear pet!"  "Ma chere, there is a time for everythi
ng," said the countess with feigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, t
urning to her husband.  "How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of
 your name day," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added, addressing
 the mother.  This blackeyed, widemouthed girl, not pretty but full of lifewith c
hildish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice, with blac
k curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs in lacefrilled drawers, and 
feet in low slipperswas just at that charming age when a girl is no longer a chil
d, though the child is not yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to
 hide her flushed face in the lace of her mother's mantillanot paying the least a
ttention to her severe remarkand began to laugh. She laughed, and in fragmentary 
sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from the folds of her 
frock.  "Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha managed to
 utter to her everything seemed funny. She leaned against her mother and burst in
to such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even the prim visitor could not help
 joining in.  "Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the mo
ther, pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning to the visi
tor she added "She is my youngest girl."  Natasha, raising her face for a moment 
from her mother's mantilla, glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and agai
n hid her face.  The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought 
it necessary to take some part in it.  "Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "
is Mimi a relation of yours? A daughter, I suppose?"  Natasha did not like the vi
sitor's tone of condescension to childish things. She did not reply, but looked a
t her seriously.  Meanwhile the younger generation Boris, the officer, Anna Mikha
ylovna's son Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest son Sonya, the count
's fifteenyearold niece, and little Petya, his youngest boy, had all settled down
 in the drawing room and were obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of d
ecorum the excitement and mirth that shone in all their faces. Evidently in the b
ack rooms, from which they had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had be
en more amusing than the drawingroom talk of society scandals, the weather, and C
ountess Apraksina. Now and then they glanced at one another, hardly able to suppr
ess their laughter.  The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from
 childhood, were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Bor
is was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate featur
es. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression. Dark hairs were al
ready showing on his upper lip, and his whole face expressed impetuosity and enth
usiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered the drawing room. He evidently tried to 
find something to say, but failed. Boris on the contrary at once found his footin
g, and related quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she wa
s still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken how she had aged during th
e five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked right across the skul
l. Having said this he glanced at Natasha. She turned away from him and glanced a
t her younger brother, who was screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed l
aughter, and unable to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from 
the room as fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Boris did not laugh. 
 "You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the carriage?" he a
sked his mother with a smile.  "Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she 
answered, returning his smile.  Boris quietly left the room and went in search of
 Natasha. The plump boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program ha
d been disturbed.      CHAPTER XII   The only young people remaining in the drawi
ng room, not counting the young lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter wh
o was four years older than her sister and behaved already like a grownup person,
 were Nicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender little brunette with a t
ender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes, thick black plaits coili
ng twice round her head, and a tawny tint in her complexion and especially in the
 color of her slender but graceful and muscular arms and neck. By the grace of he
r movements, by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain
 coyness and reserve of manner, she reminded one of a pretty, halfgrown kitten wh
ich promises to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently considered it proper
 to show an interest in the general conversation by smiling, but in spite of hers
elf her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who was going to jo
in the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that her smile could not for 
a single instant impose upon anyone, and it was clear that the kitten had settled
 down only to spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon a
s they too could, like Natasha and Boris, escape from the drawing room.  "Ah yes,
 my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and pointing to Nicholas, "his 
friend Boris has become an officer, and so for friendship's sake he is leaving th
e university and me, his old father, and entering the military service, my dear. 
And there was a place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! 
Isn't that friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.  "But they say t
hat war has been declared," replied the visitor.  "They've been saying so a long 
while," said the count, "and they'll say so again and again, and that will be the
 end of it. My dear, there's friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining the 
hussars."  The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.  "It's not at al
l from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up and turning away as if from a s
hameful aspersion. "It is not from friendship at all I simply feel that the army 
is my vocation."  He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor and they we
re both regarding him with a smile of approbation.  "Schubert, the colonel of the
 Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with us today. He has been here on leave and is tak
ing Nicholas back with him. It can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his sh
oulders and speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.  "I hav
e already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't wish to let me go, I'
ll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere except in the army I am not a diplomat o
r a government clerk.I don't know how to hide what I feel." As he spoke he kept g
lancing with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady 
visitor.  The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
 to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.  "All right, all ri
ght!" said the old count. "He always flares up! This Buonaparte has turned all th
eir heads they all think of how he rose from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, 
well, God grant it," he added, not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.  The e
lders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned to young Rostov.  "Wha
t a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so dull without you," 
said she, giving him a tender smile.  The young man, flattered, sat down nearer t
o her with a coquettish smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential co
nversation without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the hea
rt of Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk he glan
ced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry glance, and hardly able to re
strain her tears and maintain the artificial smile on her lips, she got up and le
ft the room. All Nicholas' animation vanished. He waited for the first pause in t
he conversation, and then with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya.  "H
ow plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their sleeves!" said Anna 
Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out. "Cousinagedangereux voisinage" 
* she added.        * Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.   "Yes," said the c
ountess when the brightness these young people had brought into the room had vani
shed and as if answering a question no one had put but which was always in her mi
nd, "and how much suffering, how much anxiety one has had to go through that we m
ight rejoice in them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy.
 One is always, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous both fo
r girls and boys."  "It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.  "
Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now I have always, thank 
God, been my children's friend and had their full confidence," said she, repeatin
g the mistake of so many parents who imagine that their children have no secrets 
from them. "I know I shall always be my daughters' first confidante, and that if 
Nicholas, with his impulsive nature, does get into mischief a boy can't help it, 
he will all the same never be like those Petersburg young men."  "Yes, they are s
plendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in the count, who always solved questions t
hat seemed to him perplexing by deciding that everything was splendid. "Just fanc
y wants to be an hussar. What's one to do, my dear?"  "What a charming creature y
our younger girl is," said the visitor "a little volcano!"  "Yes, a regular volca
no," said the count. "Takes after me! And what a voice she has though she's my da
ughter, I tell the truth when I say she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We hav
e engaged an Italian to give her lessons."  "Isn't she too young? I have heard th
at it harms the voice to train it at that age."  "Oh no, not at all too young!" r
eplied the count. "Why, our mothers used to be married at twelve or thirteen."  "
And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said the countess with a gentl
e smile, looking at Boris' and went on, evidently concerned with a thought that a
lways occupied her "Now you see if I were to be severe with her and to forbid it.
.. goodness knows what they might be up to on the sly" she meant that they would 
be kissing, "but as it is, I know every word she utters. She will come running to
 me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I spoil her,
 but really that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I was stricter."  "Ye
s, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome elder daughter, Cou
ntess Vera, with a smile.  But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles 
generally do on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant, 
expression. Vera was goodlooking, not at all stupid, quick at learning, was well 
brought up, and had a pleasant voice what she said was true and appropriate, yet,
 strange to say, everyonethe visitors and countess aliketurned to look at her as 
if wondering why she had said it, and they all felt awkward.  "People are always 
too clever with their eldest children and try to make something exceptional of th
em," said the visitor.  "What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countes
s was too clever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned ou
t splendidly all the same," he added, winking at Vera.  The guests got up and too
k their leave, promising to return to dinner.  "What manners! I thought they woul
d never go," said the countess, when she had seen her guests out.      CHAPTER XI
II   When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the conserv
atory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation in the drawing ro
om, waiting for Boris to come out. She was already growing impatient, and stamped
 her foot, ready to cry at his not coming at once, when she heard the young man's
 discreet steps approaching neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natasha dashed sw
iftly among the flower tubs and hid there.  Boris paused in the middle of the roo
m, looked round, brushed a little dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going 
up to a mirror examined his handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from h
er ambush, waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the gl
ass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natasha was about to call him but 
changed her mind. "Let him look for me," thought she. Hardly had Boris gone than 
Sonya, flushed, in tears, and muttering angrily, came in at the other door. Natas
ha checked her first impulse to run out to her, and remained in her hiding place,
 watchingas under an invisible capto see what went on in the world. She was exper
iencing a new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, muttering to herself, kept looking ro
und toward the drawingroom door. It opened and Nicholas came in.  "Sonya, what is
 the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running up to her.  "It's nothing, n
othing leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya.  "Ah, I know what it is."  "Well, if you do
, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"  "Sooonya! Look here! How can 
you torture me and yourself like that, for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking he
r hand.  Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, not stirring a
nd scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes. "What will ha
ppen now?" thought she.  "Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are
 everything!" said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."  "I don't like you to 
talk like that."  "Well, then, I won't only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to hi
m and kissed her.  "Oh, how nice," thought Natasha and when Sonya and Nicholas ha
d gone out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.  "Boris, com
e here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I have something to tell you.
 Here, here!" and she led him into the conservatory to the place among the tubs w
here she had been hiding.  Boris followed her, smiling.  "What is the something?"
 asked he.  She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown
 down on one of the tubs, picked it up.  "Kiss the doll," said she.  Boris looked
 attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not reply.  "Don't you want to
? Well, then, come here," said she, and went further in among the plants and thre
w down the doll. "Closer, closer!" she whispered.  She caught the young officer b
y his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and fear appeared on her flushed face.  "And
 me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly, glancing up at h
im from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from excitement.  Boris blush
ed.  "How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing still more, b
ut he waited and did nothing.  Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher tha
n he, embraced him so that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck,
 and, tossing back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.  Then she slipped down 
among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs and stood, hanging her head.  
"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but..."  "You are in love with me?
" Natasha broke in.  "Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In anot
her four years... then I will ask for your hand."  Natasha considered.  "Thirteen
, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender little fingers. "All ri
ght! Then it's settled?"  A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face. 
 "Settled!" replied Boris.  "Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"
  She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining sitting
 room.      CHAPTER XIV   After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired
 that she gave orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to inv
ite to dinner all who came "to congratulate." The countess wished to have a tetea
tete talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna Mikhaylovna, whom she h
ad not seen properly since she returned from Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with h
er tearworn but pleasant face, drew her chair nearer to that of the countess.  "W
ith you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There are not many left o
f us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship."  Anna Mikhaylovna looke
d at Vera and paused. The countess pressed her friend's hand.  "Vera," she said t
o her eldest daughter who was evidently not a favorite, "how is it you have so li
ttle tact? Don't you see you are not wanted here? Go to the other girls, or..."  
The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt.  "If you ha
d told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replied as she rose to go to her
 own room.  But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting, o
ne pair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya was sitting clos
e to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, the first he had ever writ
ten. Boris and Natasha were at the other window and ceased talking when Vera ente
red. Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera with guilty, happy faces.  It was pleasant 
and touching to see these little girls in love but apparently the sight of them r
oused no pleasant feeling in Vera.  "How often have I asked you not to take my th
ings?" she said. "You have a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Ni
cholas.  "In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen.  "You always manag
e to do things at the wrong time," continued Vera. "You came rushing into the dra
wing room so that everyone felt ashamed of you."  Though what she said was quite 
just, perhaps for that very reason no one replied, and the four simply looked at 
one another. She lingered in the room with the inkstand in her hand.  "And at you
r age what secrets can there be between Natasha and Boris, or between you two? It
's all nonsense!"  "Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defen
se, speaking very gently.  She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affe
ctionate to everyone.  "Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets ind
eed!"  "All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer. "We don
't interfere with you and Berg."  "I should think not," said Vera, "because there
 can never be anything wrong in my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you are
 behaving with Boris."  "Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Bor
is. "I have nothing to complain of."  "Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that
 it is really tiresome," said Natasha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly
. She used the word "diplomat," which was just then much in vogue among the child
ren, in the special sense they attached to it. "Why does she bother me?" And she 
added, turning to Vera, "You'll never understand it, because you've never loved a
nyone. You have no heart! You are a Madame de Genlis and nothing more" this nickn
ame, bestowed on Vera by Nicholas, was considered very stinging, "and your greate
st pleasure is to be unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as much as you 
please," she finished quickly.  "I shall at any rate not run after a young man be
fore visitors..."  "Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas"said 
unpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to the nursery."  All four
, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.  "The unpleasant things
 were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said none to anyone."  "Madame de Genlis! Ma
dame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices through the door.  The handsome Vera, wh
o produced such an irritating and unpleasant effect on everyone, smiled and, evid
ently unmoved by what had been said to her, went to the looking glass and arrange
d her hair and scarf. Looking at her own handsome face she seemed to become still
 colder and calmer.   In the drawing room the conversation was still going on.  "
Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all roses either. Don't I know t
hat at the rate we are living our means won't last long? It's all the Club and hi
s easygoing nature. Even in the country do we get any rest? Theatricals, hunting,
 and heaven knows what besides! But don't let's talk about me tell me how you man
aged everything. I often wonder at you, Annettehow at your age you can rush off a
lone in a carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those ministers and great people,
 and know how to deal with them all! It's quite astonishing. How did you get thin
gs settled? I couldn't possibly do it."  "Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna
, "God grant you never know what it is to be left a widow without means and with 
a son you love to distraction! One learns many things then," she added with a cer
tain pride. "That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one of those big peo
ple I write a note 'Princess SoandSo desires an interview with So andSo,' and the
n I take a cab and go myself two, three, or four timestill I get what I want. I d
on't mind what they think of me."  "Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" 
asked the countess. "You see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my 
Nicholas is going as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself for him. To whom
 did you apply?"  "To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everyth
ing, and put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna enthu
siastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she had endured to gain her end
.  "Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have not seen him since 
we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I expect he has forgotten me. 
He paid me attentions in those days," said the countess, with a smile.  "He is ju
st the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowing with amiability. His
 position has not turned his head at all. He said to me, 'I am sorry I can do so 
little for you, dear Princess. I am at your command.' Yes, he is a fine fellow an
d a very kind relation. But, Nataly, you know my love for my son I would do anyth
ing for his happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is n
ow a terrible one," continued Anna Mikhaylovna, sadly, dropping her voice. "My wr
etched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress. Would you believe it, I ha
ve literally not a penny and don't know how to equip Boris." She took out her han
dkerchief and began to cry. "I need five hundred rubles, and have only one twenty
fiveruble note. I am in such a state.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladi
mirovich Bezukhov. If he will not assist his godsonyou know he is Bory's godfathe
rand allow him something for his maintenance, all my trouble will have been throw
n away.... I shall not be able to equip him."  The countess' eyes filled with tea
rs and she pondered in silence.  "I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," sai
d the princess, "that here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all 
alone... that tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a burden to 
him, and Bory's life is only just beginning...."  "Surely he will leave something
 to Boris," said the countess.  "Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees 
are so selfish. Still, I will take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shall s
peak to him straight out. Let people think what they will of me, it's really all 
the same to me when my son's fate is at stake." The princess rose. "It's now two 
o'clock and you dine at four. There will just be time."  And like a practical Pet
ersburg lady who knows how to make the most of time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someon
e to call her son, and went into the anteroom with him.  "Goodby, my dear," said 
she to the countess who saw her to the door, and added in a whisper so that her s
on should not hear, "Wish me good luck."  "Are you going to Count Cyril Vladimiro
vich, my dear?" said the count coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom,
 and he added "If he is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the ho
use, you know, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my dear. We w
ill see how Taras distinguishes himself today. He says Count Orlov never gave suc
h a dinner as ours will be!"      CHAPTER XV   "My dear Boris," said Princess Ann
a Mikhaylovna to her son as Countess Rostova's carriage in which they were seated
 drove over the straw covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count 
Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother, drawing h
er hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly and tenderly on her son
's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him. Count Cyril Vladimirovich is your 
godfather after all, your future depends on him. Remember that, my dear, and be n
ice to him, as you so well know how to be."  "If only I knew that anything beside
s humiliation would come of it..." answered her son coldly. "But I have promised 
and will do it for your sake."  Although the hall porter saw someone's carriage s
tanding at the entrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son who without asking
 to be announced had passed straight through the glass porch between the rows of 
statues in niches and looking significantly at the lady's old cloak, he asked whe
ther they wanted the count or the princesses, and, hearing that they wished to se
e the count, said his excellency was worse today, and that his excellency was not
 receiving anyone.  "We may as well go back," said the son in French.  "My dear!"
 exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand on his arm as if that to
uch might soothe or rouse him.  Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his
 mother without taking off his cloak.  "My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gent
le tones, addressing the hall porter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very i
ll... that's why I have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my frie
nd... I only need see Prince Vasili Sergeevich he is staying here, is he not? Ple
ase announce me."  The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and
 turned away.  "Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called 
to a footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallowtail coat, who ran dow
nstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.  The mother smoothed the folds 
of her dyed silk dress before a large Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her tro
ddendown shoes briskly ascended the carpeted stairs.  "My dear," she said to her 
son, once more stimulating him by a touch, "you promised me!"  The son, lowering 
his eyes, followed her quietly.  They entered the large hall, from which one of t
he doors led to the apartments assigned to Prince Vasili.  Just as the mother and
 son, having reached the middle of the hall, were about to ask their way of an el
derly footman who had sprung up as they entered, the bronze handle of one of the 
doors turned and Prince Vasili came outwearing a velvet coat with a single star o
n his breast, as was his custom when at hometaking leave of a goodlooking, darkha
ired man. This was the celebrated Petersburg doctor, Lorrain.  "Then it is certai
n?" said the prince.  "Prince, humanum est errare, * but..." replied the doctor, 
swallowing his r's, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.        
* To err is human.   "Very well, very well..."  Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her s
on, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor with a bow and approached them silently an
d with a look of inquiry. The son noticed that an expression of profound sorrow s
uddenly clouded his mother's face, and he smiled slightly.  "Ah, Prince! In what 
sad circumstances we meet again! And how is our dear invalid?" said she, as thoug
h unaware of the cold offensive look fixed on her.  Prince Vasili stared at her a
nd at Boris questioningly and perplexed. Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili with
out acknowledging the bow turned to Anna Mikhaylovna, answering her query by a mo
vement of the head and lips indicating very little hope for the patient.  "Is it 
possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It is terrible to think...
. This is my son," she added, indicating Boris. "He wanted to thank you himself."
  Boris bowed again politely.  "Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never f
orget what you have done for us."  "I am glad I was able to do you a service, my 
dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and in tone
 and manner, here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed under an oblig
ation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he had done in Petersburg 
at Anna Scherer's reception.  "Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added
 he, addressing Boris with severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he we
nt on in his usual tone of indifference.  "I am awaiting orders to join my new re
giment, your excellency," replied Boris, betraying neither annoyance at the princ
e's brusque manner nor a desire to enter into conversation, but speaking so quiet
ly and respectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance.  "Are you living
 with your mother?"  "I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again ad
ding, "your excellency."  "That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina
," said Anna Mikhaylovna.  "I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monoto
nous voice. "I never could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry that u
nlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too, I am told.
"  "But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a pathetic smile, as
 though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure, but asked him not t
o be too hard on the poor old man. "What do the doctors say?" asked the princess 
after a pause, her worn face again expressing deep sorrow.  "They give little hop
e," replied the prince.  "And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his ki
ndness to me and Boris. He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that th
is fact ought to give Prince Vasili much satisfaction.  Prince Vasili became thou
ghtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw that he was afraid of finding in her a r
ival for Count Bezukhov's fortune, and hastened to reassure him.  "If it were not
 for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle," said she, uttering the word wit
h peculiar assurance and unconcern, "I know his character noble, upright... but y
ou see he has no one with him except the young princesses.... They are still youn
g...." She bent her head and continued in a whisper "Has he performed his final d
uty, Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things no worse, a
nd it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill. We women, Prince," 
and she smiled tenderly, "always know how to say these things. I absolutely must 
see him, however painful it may be for me. I am used to suffering."  Evidently th
e prince understood her, and also understood, as he had done at Anna Pavlovna's, 
that it would be difficult to get rid of Anna Mikhaylovna.  "Would not such a mee
ting be too trying for him, dear Anna Mikhaylovna?" said he. "Let us wait until e
vening. The doctors are expecting a crisis."  "But one cannot delay, Prince, at s
uch a moment! Consider that the welfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful 
the duties of a Christian..."  A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of
 the princesses, the count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length o
f her body was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasili turn
ed to her.  "Well, how is he?"  "Still the same but what can you expect, this noi
se..." said the princess, looking at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a stranger.  "Ah, my 
dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happy smile, ambling light
ly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and am at your service to help you nurs
e my uncle. I imagine what you have gone through," and she sympathetically turned
 up her eyes.  The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the ro
om as Anna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she had co
nquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasili to take a seat besid
e her.  "Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see the coun
t, my uncle but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile and don't forget 
to give him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask him to dinner. I suppose he won't g
o?" she continued, turning to the prince.  "On the contrary," replied the prince,
 who had plainly become depressed, "I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of
 that young man.... Here he is, and the count has not once asked for him."  He sh
rugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one flight of stairs and up 
another, to Pierre's rooms.      CHAPTER XVI   Pierre, after all, had not managed
 to choose a career for himself in Petersburg, and had been expelled from there f
or riotous conduct and sent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's
 was true. Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had now been 
for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father's house. Though he
 expected that the story of his escapade would be already known in Moscow and tha
t the ladies about his fatherwho were never favorably disposed toward himwould ha
ve used it to turn the count against him, he nevertheless on the day of his arriv
al went to his father's part of the house. Entering the drawing room, where the p
rincesses spent most of their time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom were sitti
ng at embroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the eldest who was readi
ngthe one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna. The two younger ones were embroidering bo
th were rosy and pretty and they differed only in that one had a little mole on h
er lip which made her much prettier. Pierre was received as if he were a corpse o
r a leper. The eldest princess paused in her reading and silently stared at him w
ith frightened eyes the second assumed precisely the same expression while the yo
ungest, the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition, bent
 over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene she foresaw.
 She drew her wool down through the canvas and, scarcely able to refrain from lau
ghing, stooped as if trying to make out the pattern.  "How do you do, cousin?" sa
id Pierre. "You don't recognize me?"  "I recognize you only too well, too well." 
 "How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual, but unabash
ed.  "The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you have don
e your best to increase his mental sufferings."  "Can I see the count?" Pierre ag
ain asked.  "Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can see hi
m... Olga, go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is readyit is almost time," she ad
ded, giving Pierre to understand that they were busy, and busy making his father 
comfortable, while evidently he, Pierre, was only busy causing him annoyance.  Ol
ga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters then he bowed and said "Then I w
ill go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can see him."  And he left the ro
om, followed by the low but ringing laughter of the sister with the mole.  Next d
ay Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house. He sent for Pierre
 and said to him "My dear fellow, if you are going to behave here as you did in P
etersburg, you will end very badly that is all I have to say to you. The count is
 very, very ill, and you must not see him at all."  Since then Pierre had not bee
n disturbed and had spent the whole time in his rooms upstairs.  When Boris appea
red at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room, stopping occasionally at 
a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall, as if running a sword through an 
invisible foe, and glaring savagely over his spectacles, and then again resuming 
his walk, muttering indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating. 
 "England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger at someone unse
en. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rights of man, is sentenced 
to..." But before Pierrewho at that moment imagined himself to be Napoleon in per
son and to have just effected the dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and 
captured Londoncould pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a wellbuilt and handsome y
oung officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left Moscow when Boris was 
a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him, but in his usual impulsive and he
arty way he took Boris by the hand with a friendly smile.  "Do you remember me?" 
asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile. "I have come with my mother to see the
 count, but it seems he is not well."  "Yes, it seems he is ill. People are alway
s disturbing him," answered Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.  B
oris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider it necessary to 
introduce himself, and without experiencing the least embarrassment looked Pierre
 straight in the face.  "Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he,
 after a considerable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.  "Ah, Count Ros
tov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his son, Ilya? Only fancy, I didn'
t know you at first. Do you remember how we went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame
 Jacquot?... It's such an age..."  "You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, w
ith a bold and slightly sarcastic smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna Mikhay
lovna Drubetskaya. Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas. I never 
knew any Madame Jacquot."  Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosqu
itoes or bees.  "Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. One
 has so many relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well, now we know 
where we are. And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition? The English will 
come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across the Channel. I think the expedi
tion is quite feasible. If only Villeneuve doesn't make a mess of things!"  Boris
 knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition he did not read the papers and it was
 the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.  "We here in Moscow are more occu
pied with dinner parties and scandal than with politics," said he in his quiet ir
onical tone. "I know nothing about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is ch
iefly busy with gossip," he continued. "Just now they are talking about you and y
our father."  Pierre smiled in his goodnatured way as if afraid for his companion
's sake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret. But Boris
 spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight into Pierre's eyes.  "Mos
cow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on. "Everybody is wondering to
 whom the count will leave his fortune, though he may perhaps outlive us all, as 
I sincerely hope he will..."  "Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "
very horrid."  Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently say 
something disconcerting to himself.  "And it must seem to you," said Boris flushi
ng slightly, but not changing his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that eve
ryone is trying to get something out of the rich man?"  "So it does," thought Pie
rre.  "But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are quite mis
taken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are very poor, but for 
my own part at any rate, for the very reason that your father is rich, I don't re
gard myself as a relation of his, and neither I nor my mother would ever ask or t
ake anything from him."  For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he
 did, he jumped up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clum
sy way, and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a feeling of mingl
ed shame and vexation.  "Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could thi
nk?... I know very well..."  But Boris again interrupted him.  "I am glad I have 
spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? You must excuse me," said he, putt
ing Pierre at ease instead of being put at ease by him, "but I hope I have not of
fended you. I always make it a rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to tak
e? Will you come to dinner at the Rostovs'?"  And Boris, having apparently reliev
ed himself of an onerous duty and extricated himself from an awkward situation an
d placed another in it, became quite pleasant again.  "No, but I say," said Pierr
e, calming down, "you are a wonderful fellow! What you have just said is good, ve
ry good. Of course you don't know me. We have not met for such a long time... not
 since we were children. You might think that I... I understand, quite understand
. I could not have done it myself, I should not have had the courage, but it's sp
lendid. I am very glad to have made your acquaintance. It's queer," he added afte
r a pause, "that you should have suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well, what of
 it! I hope we'll get better acquainted," and he pressed Boris' hand. "Do you kno
w, I have not once been in to see the count. He has not sent for me.... I am sorr
y for him as a man, but what can one do?"  "And so you think Napoleon will manage
 to get an army across?" asked Boris with a smile.  Pierre saw that Boris wished 
to change the subject, and being of the same mind he began explaining the advanta
ges and disadvantages of the Boulogne expedition.  A footman came in to summon Bo
risthe princess was going. Pierre, in order to make Boris' better acquaintance, p
romised to come to dinner, and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately ove
r his spectacles into Boris' eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up a
nd down the room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with his im
aginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant, intelligent, and 
resolute young man.  As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads
 a lonely life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made u
p his mind that they would be friends.  Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She h
eld a handkerchief to her eyes and her face was tearful.  "It is dreadful, dreadf
ul!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may I shall do my duty. I will come and
 spend the night. He must not be left like this. Every moment is precious. I can'
t think why his nieces put it off. Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prep
are him!... Adieu, Prince! May God support you..."  "Adieu, ma bonne," answered P
rince Vasili turning away from her.  "Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mo
ther to her son when they were in the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody."  
"I don't understand, Mammawhat is his attitude to Pierre?" asked the son.  "The w
ill will show that, my dear our fate also depends on it."  "But why do you expect
 that he will leave us anything?"  "Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poo
r!"  "Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma..."  "Oh, Heaven! How ill h
e is!" exclaimed the mother.      CHAPTER XVII   After Anna Mikhaylovna had drive
n off with her son to visit Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova 
sat for a long time all alone applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she 
rang.  "What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid who k
ept her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'll find you ano
ther place."  The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating pover
ty, and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always found e
xpression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her with exaggerated poli
teness.  "I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.  "Ask the count to come to 
me."  The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as usu
al.  "Well, little countess? What a saute of game au madere we are to have, my de
ar! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not illspent. He is wo
rth it!"  He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling
 his gray hair.  "What are your commands, little countess?"  "You see, my dear...
 What's that mess?" she said, pointing to his waistcoat. "It's the saute, most li
kely," she added with a smile. "Well, you see, Count, I want some money."  Her fa
ce became sad.  "Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get out
 his pocketbook.  "I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and t
aking out her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.  "Ye
s, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out in a tone only used
 by persons who are certain that those they call will rush to obey the summons. "
Send Dmitri to me!"  Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the 
count's house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.  "Th
is is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the deferential young man w
ho had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected a moment, "yes, bring me seven hundred
 rubles, yes! But mind, don't bring me such tattered and dirty notes as last time
, but nice clean ones for the countess."  "Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said
 the countess, sighing deeply.  "When would you like them, your excellency?" aske
d Dmitri. "Allow me to inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing th
at the count was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sign
 of approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it brought at once?"  "Ye
s, yes just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess."  "What a treasure that Dmitri
 is," added the count with a smile when the young man had departed. "There is nev
er any 'impossible' with him. That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible."  "A
h, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world," said the countes
s. "But I am in great need of this sum."  "You, my little countess, are a notorio
us spendthrift," said the count, and having kissed his wife's hand he went back t
o his study.  When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all
 in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess' little tab
le, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that something was agitating her.  "Well, my dea
r?" asked the countess.  "Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know 
him, he is so ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."  "An
nette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began, with a blush that 
looked very strange on her thin, dignified, elderly face, and she took the money 
from under the handkerchief.  Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention an
d stooped to be ready to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.  "This i
s for Boris from me, for his outfit."  Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her
 and weeping. The countess wept too. They wept because they were friends, and bec
ause they were kindhearted, and because theyfriends from childhoodhad to think ab
out such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over.... But those te
ars were pleasant to them both.      CHAPTER XVIII   Countess Rostova, with her d
aughters and a large number of guests, was already seated in the drawing room. Th
e count took the gentlemen into his study and showed them his choice collection o
f Turkish pipes. From time to time he went out to ask "Hasn't she come yet?" They
 were expecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le terrible dra
gon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for common sense and frank 
plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was known to the Imperial family as well as
 to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both cities wondered at her, laughed privately
 at her rudenesses, and told good stories about her, while none the less all with
out exception respected and feared her.  In the count's room, which was full of t
obacco smoke, they talked of war that had been announced in a manifesto, and abou
t the recruiting. None of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it h
ad appeared. The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were smoking and ta
lking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his head first to one side and t
hen to the other watched the smokers with evident pleasure and listened to the co
nversation of his two neighbors, whom he egged on against each other.  One of the
m was a sallow, cleanshaven civilian with a thin and wrinkled face, already growi
ng old, though he was dressed like a most fashionable young man. He sat with his 
legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and, having stuck an amber mouthpiece far
 into his mouth, was inhaling the smoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. T
his was an old bachelor, Shinshin, a cousin of the countess', a man with "a sharp
 tongue" as they said in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to his com
panion. The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards, irreproachably washed, b
rushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the middle of his mouth and with red lips 
gently inhaled the smoke, letting it escape from his handsome mouth in rings. Thi
s was Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenov regiment with whom Boris was to 
travel to join the army, and about whom Natasha had, teased her elder sister Vera
, speaking of Berg as her "intended." The count sat between them and listened att
entively. His favorite occupation when not playing boston, a card game he was ver
y fond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in setting two loqu
acious talkers at one another.  "Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphons
e Karlovich," said Shinshin, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Rus
sian expressions with the choicest French phraseswhich was a peculiarity of his s
peech. "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat * you want to make somethin
g out of your company?"        * You expect to make an income out of the governme
nt.   "No, Peter Nikolaevich I only want to show that in the cavalry the advantag
es are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my own position now, Peter Ni
kolaevich..."  Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. His
 conversation always related entirely to himself he would remain calm and silent 
when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearing on himself. He coul
d remain silent for hours without being at all put out of countenance himself or 
making others uncomfortable, but as soon as the conversation concerned himself he
 would begin to talk circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.  "Consider m
y position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry I should get not more than t
wo hundred rubles every four months, even with the rank of lieutenant but as it i
s I receive two hundred and thirty," said he, looking at Shinshin and the count w
ith a joyful, pleasant smile, as if it were obvious to him that his success must 
always be the chief desire of everyone else.  "Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, b
y exchanging into the Guards I shall be in a more prominent position," continued 
Berg, "and vacancies occur much more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just thi
nk what can be done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a li
ttle aside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting a smoke ring
.  "La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as the proverb says
," remarked Shinshin, moving his pipe to the other side of his mouth and winking 
at the count.         * So that squares matters.   The count burst out laughing. 
The other guests seeing that Shinshin was talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivi
ous of irony or indifference, continued to explain how by exchanging into the Gua
rds he had already gained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps how in wa
rtime the company commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company, mi
ght easily succeed to the post how popular he was with everyone in the regiment, 
and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidently enjoyed narrating all t
his, and did not seem to suspect that others, too, might have their own interests
. But all he said was so prettily sedate, and the naivete of his youthful egotism
 was so obvious, that he disarmed his hearers.  "Well, my boy, you'll get along w
herever you gofoot or horsethat I'll warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the 
shoulder and taking his feet off the sofa.  Berg smiled joyously. The count, by h
is guests, went into the drawing room.  It was just the moment before a big dinne
r when the assembled guests, expecting the summons to zakuska, * avoid engaging i
n any long conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order t
o show that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host and hostess lo
ok toward the door, and now and then glance at one another, and the visitors try 
to guess from these glances who, or what, they are waiting forsome important rela
tion who has not yet arrived, or a dish that is not yet ready.        * Hors d'oe
uvres.   Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in the midd
le of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across, blocking the way fo
r everyone. The countess tried to make him talk, but he went on naively looking a
round through his spectacles as if in search of somebody and answered all her que
stions in monosyllables. He was in the way and was the only one who did not notic
e the fact. Most of the guests, knowing of the affair with the bear, looked with 
curiosity at this big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest fell
ow could have played such a prank on a policeman.  "You have only lately arrived?
" the countess asked him.  "Oui, madame," replied he, looking around him.  "You h
ave not yet seen my husband?"  "Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.  "
You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's very interesting."  "V
ery interesting."  The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latt
er understood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, and sitting d
own beside him she began to speak about his father but he answered her, as he had
 the countess, only in monosyllables. The other guests were all conversing with o
ne another. "The Razumovskis... It was charming... You are very kind... Countess 
Apraksina..." was heard on all sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroo
m.  "Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.  "Herself," came the answer in
 a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievna entered the room.  All the unmarried ladies 
and even the married ones except the very oldest rose. Marya Dmitrievna paused at
 the door. Tall and stout, holding high her fiftyyearold head with its gray curls
, she stood surveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as if r
olling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.  "Health and happiness 
to her whose name day we are keeping and to her children," she said, in her loud,
 fulltoned voice which drowned all others. "Well, you old sinner," she went on, t
urning to the count who was kissing her hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, I d
aresay? Nowhere to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just see
 how these nestlings are growing up," and she pointed to the girls. "You must loo
k for husbands for them whether you like it or not...."  "Well," said she, "how's
 my Cossack?" Marya Dmitrievna always called Natasha a Cossack and she stroked th
e child's arm as she came up fearless and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a s
camp of a girl, but I like her."  She took a pair of pearshaped ruby earrings fro
m her huge reticule and, having given them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed with t
he pleasure of her saint'sday fete, turned away at once and addressed herself to 
Pierre.  "Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high tone o
f voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up her sleeves still 
higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a childlike way through his spectacl
es.  "Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tell your fa
ther the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's my evident duty." She 
paused. All were silent, expectant of what was to follow, for this was clearly on
ly a prelude.  "A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathb
ed and he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir, for 
shame! It would be better if you went to the war."  She turned away and gave her 
hand to the count, who could hardly keep from laughing.  "Well, I suppose it is t
ime we were at table?" said Marya Dmitrievna.  The count went in first with Marya
 Dmitrievna, the countess followed on the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of i
mportance to them because Nicholas was to go with him to the regiment then came A
nna Mikhaylovna with Shinshin. Berg gave his arm to Vera. The smiling Julie Karag
ina went in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling the whole d
ining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governesses followed singly
. The footmen began moving about, chairs scraped, the band struck up in the galle
ry, and the guests settled down in their places. Then the strains of the count's 
household band were replaced by the clatter of knives and forks, the voices of vi
sitors, and the soft steps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the counte
ss with Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left, the other
 lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count, with the hussar
 colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other male visitors on his right. Midwa
y down the long table on one side sat the grownup young people Vera beside Berg, 
and Pierre beside Boris and on the other side, the children, tutors, and governes
ses. From behind the crystal decanters and fruit vases the count kept glancing at
 his wife and her tall cap with its lightblue ribbons, and busily filled his neig
hbors' glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in turn, without omitting he
r duties as hostess, threw significant glances from behind the pineapples at her 
husband whose face and bald head seemed by their redness to contrast more than us
ual with his gray hair. At the ladies' end an even chatter of voices was heard al
l the time, at the men's end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially tha
t of the colonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so 
much that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg with tende
r smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but a heavenly feeling. B
oris was telling his new friend Pierre who the guests were and exchanging glances
 with Natasha, who was sitting opposite. Pierre spoke little but examined the new
 faces, and ate a great deal. Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory pattie
s and went on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of the wines. The
se latter the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a napkin, from behin
d the next man's shoulders and whispered "Dry Madeira"... "Hungarian"... or "Rhin
e wine" as the case might be. Of the four crystal glasses engraved with the count
's monogram that stood before his plate, Pierre held out one at random and drank 
with enjoyment, gazing with everincreasing amiability at the other guests. Natash
a, who sat opposite, was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy th
ey are in love with and have just kissed for the first time. Sometimes that same 
look fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little girl's look made him inclined t
o laugh without knowing why.  Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Ju
lie Karagina, to whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonya
 wore a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy now she turned pale
, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas and Julie were s
aying to one another. The governess kept looking round uneasily as if preparing t
o resent any slight that might be put upon the children. The German tutor was try
ing to remember all the dishes, wines, and kinds of dessert, in order to send a f
ull description of the dinner to his people in Germany and he felt greatly offend
ed when the butler with a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, t
rying to appear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified because
 no one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or from greediness 
that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire for knowledge.      CHA
PTER XIX   At the men's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated. Th
e colonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared in Petersbur
g and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day been forwarded by cour
ier to the commander in chief.  "And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonapart
e?" remarked Shinshin. "He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our
 turn next."  The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted 
to the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's remark.  "It is 
for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with a German accent, "for the r
easson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He declares in ze manifessto zat he cannot fiew 
wiz indifference ze danger vreatening Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze 
Empire as vell as ze sanctity of its alliances..." he spoke this last word with p
articular emphasis as if in it lay the gist of the matter.  Then with the unerrin
g official memory that characterized him he repeated from the opening words of th
e manifesto  ... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute 
aimto establish peace in Europe on firm foundationshas now decided him to despatc
h part of the army abroad and to create a new condition for the attainment of tha
t purpose.  "Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinking a tumbler of wine
 with dignity and looking to the count for approval.  "Connaissezvous le Proverbe
 * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turn spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puc
kering his brows and smiling. "Cela nous convient a merveille.*2 Suvorov nowhe kn
ew what he was about yet they beat him a plate couture,*3 and where are we to fin
d Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*4 said he, continually changing from Fre
nch to Russian.        *Do you know the proverb?       *2 That suits us down to t
he ground.       *3 Hollow.       *4 I just ask you that.   "Ve must vight to the
 last trrop of our plood!" said the colonel, thumping the table "and ve must tie 
for our Emperor, and zen all vill pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po
oossible"... he dwelt particularly on the word possible... "as pooossible," he en
ded, again turning to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and zere'
s an end of it! And how do you, a young man and a young hussar, how do you judge 
of it?" he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he heard that the war was being d
iscussed had turned from his partner with eyes and ears intent on the colonel.  "
I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning his plate roun
d and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision and desperation as thoug
h he were at that moment facing some great danger. "I am convinced that we Russia
ns must die or conquer," he concluded, consciousas were othersafter the words wer
e uttered that his remarks were too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion an
d were therefore awkward.  "What you said just now was splendid!" said his partne
r Julie.  Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and dow
n to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.  Pierre listened to the 
colonel's speech and nodded approvingly.  "That's fine," said he.  "The young man
's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumping the table.  "What are you 
making such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice suddenly inq
uired from the other end of the table. "What are you thumping the table for?" she
 demanded of the hussar, "and why are you exciting yourself? Do you think the Fre
nch are here?"  "I am speaking ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile.  "It's
 all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You know my son's going, 
Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going."  "I have four sons in the army but still I do
n't fret. It is all in God's hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you 
in a battle," replied Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carried the who
le length of the table.  "That's true!"  Once more the conversations concentrated
, the ladies' at the one end and the men's at the other.  "You won't ask," Natash
a's little brother was saying "I know you won't ask!"  "I will," replied Natasha.
  Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She half rose, b
y a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to what was coming, and t
urning to her mother  "Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish
 voice, audible the whole length of the table.  "What is it?" asked the countess,
 startled but seeing by her daughter's face that it was only mischief, she shook 
a finger at her sternly with a threatening and forbidding movement of her head.  
The conversation was hushed.  "Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Nata
sha's voice sounded still more firm and resolute.  The countess tried to frown, b
ut could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook her fat finger.  "Cossack!" she said threate
ningly.  Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at the el
ders.  "You had better take care!" said the countess.  "Mamma! What sweets are we
 going to have?" Natasha again cried boldly, with saucy gaiety, confident that he
r prank would be taken in good part.  Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with 
laughter.  "You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and t
o Pierre, glancing at him again.  "Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Mary
a Dmitrievna.  Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved ev
en Marya Dmitrievna.  "Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like i
ce cream."  "Carrot ices."  "No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she alm
ost screamed "I want to know!"  Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laugh
ing, and all the guests joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's an
swer but at the incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dar
ed to treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.  Natasha only desisted when she had
 been told that there would be pineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was serv
ed round. The band again struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests
, leaving their seats, went up to "congratulate" the countess, and reached across
 the table to clink glasses with the count, with the children, and with one anoth
er. Again the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and in the same order in whic
h they had entered but with redder faces, the guests returned to the drawing room
 and to the count's study.      CHAPTER XX   The card tables were drawn out, sets
 made up for boston, and the count's visitors settled themselves, some in the two
 drawing rooms, some in the sitting room, some in the library.  The count, holdin
g his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty from dropping into his usual af
terdinner nap, and laughed at everything. The young people, at the countess' inst
igation, gathered round the clavichord and harp. Julie by general request played 
first. After she had played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined 
the other young ladies in begging Natasha and Nicholas, who were noted for their 
musical talent, to sing something. Natasha, who was treated as though she were gr
own up, was evidently very proud of this but at the same time felt shy.  "What sh
all we sing?" she said.  "'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.  "Well, then, let's b
e quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But where is Sonya?"  She looked round
 and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran to look for her.  Running int
o Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha ran to the nursery, but Sonya w
as not there either. Natasha concluded that she must be on the chest in the passa
ge. The chest in the passage was the place of mourning for the younger female gen
eration in the Rostov household. And there in fact was Sonya lying face downward 
on Nurse's dirty feather bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy pink dr
ess under her, hiding her face with her slender fingers, and sobbing so convulsiv
ely that her bare little shoulders shook. Natasha's face, which had been so radia
ntly happy all that saint's day, suddenly changed her eyes became fixed, and then
 a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners of her mouth drooped.  "Sony
a! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" And Natasha's large mou
th widened, making her look quite ugly, and she began to wail like a baby without
 knowing why, except that Sonya was crying. Sonya tried to lift her head to answe
r but could not, and hid her face still deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sitting 
on the bluestriped feather bed and hugging her friend. With an effort Sonya sat u
p and began wiping her eyes and explaining.  "Nicholas is going away in a week's 
time, his... papers... have come... he told me himself... but still I should not 
cry," and she showed a paper she held in her handwith the verses Nicholas had wri
tten, "still, I should not cry, but you can't... no one can understand... what a 
soul he has!"  And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.  "It'
s all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and Boris also," she we
nt on, gaining a little strength "he is nice... there are no difficulties in your
 way.... But Nicholas is my cousin... one would have to... the Metropolitan himse
lf... and even then it can't be done. And besides, if she tells Mamma" Sonya look
ed upon the countess as her mother and called her so "that I am spoiling Nicholas
' career and am heartless and ungrateful, while truly... God is my witness," and 
she made the sign of the cross, "I love her so much, and all of you, only Vera...
 And what for? What have I done to her? I am so grateful to you that I would will
ingly sacrifice everything, only I have nothing...."  Sonya could not continue, a
nd again hid her face in her hands and in the feather bed. Natasha began consolin
g her, but her face showed that she understood all the gravity of her friend's tr
ouble.  "Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true reason of
 her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something to you since dinner? Hasn
't she?"  "Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, and
 she found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that I was ung
rateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me, but that he'll marry J
ulie. You see how he's been with her all day... Natasha, what have I done to dese
rve it?..."  And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha lifte
d her up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began comforting her.  "Son
ya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you remember how we and Nic
holas, all three of us, talked in the sitting room after supper? Why, we settled 
how everything was to be. I don't quite remember how, but don't you remember that
 it could all be arranged and how nice it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's broth
er has married his first cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know. And Bo
ris says it is quite possible. You know I have told him all about it. And he is s
o clever and so good!" said Natasha. "Don't you cry, Sonya, dear love, darling So
nya!" and she kissed her and laughed. "Vera's spiteful never mind her! And all wi
ll come right and she won't say anything to Mamma. Nicholas will tell her himself
, and he doesn't care at all for Julie."  Natasha kissed her on the hair.  Sonya 
sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and it seemed ready to lift
 its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and begin playing with the ball of worsted
 as a kitten should.  "Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoo
thing her frock and hair.  "Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushing in a crisp 
lock that had strayed from under her friend's plaits.  Both laughed.  "Well, let'
s go and sing 'The Brook.'"  "Come along!"  "Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat
 opposite me is so funny!" said Natasha, stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"  A
nd she set off at a run along the passage.  Sonya, shaking off some down which cl
ung to her and tucking away the verses in the bosom of her dress close to her bon
y little chest, ran after Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flu
shed face and light, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the young people sang
 the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted. Then Nicholas san
g a song he had just learned      At nighttime in the moon's fair glow      How s
weet, as fancies wander free,    To feel that in this world there's one      Who 
still is thinking but of thee!     That while her fingers touch the harp      Waf
ting sweet music o'er the lea,    It is for thee thus swells her heart,      Sigh
ing its message out to thee...     A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,      But oh
! till then I cannot live!...   He had not finished the last verse before the you
ng people began to get ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the fee
t and the coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.   Pierre was sit
ting in the drawingroom where Shinshin had engaged him, as a man recently returne
d from abroad, in a political conversation in which several others joined but whi
ch bored Pierre. When the music began Natasha came in and walking straight up to 
Pierre said, laughing and blushing  "Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers
."  "I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied "but if you will be my te
acher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slender little girl.  Whi
le the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up, Pierre sat 
down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy she was dancing with a 
grownup man, who had been abroad. She was sitting in a conspicuous place and talk
ing to him like a grownup lady. She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies 
had given her to hold. Assuming quite the pose of a society woman heaven knows wh
en and where she had learned it she talked with her partner, fanning herself and 
smiling over the fan.  "Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as 
she crossed the ballroom, pointing to Natasha.  Natasha blushed and laughed.  "We
ll, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised at?"   In the mi
dst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs being pushed back in the
 sitting room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna had been playing cards with th
e majority of the more distinguished and older visitors. They now, stretching the
mselves after sitting so long, and replacing their purses and pocketbooks, entere
d the ballroom. First came Marya Dmitrievna and the count, both with merry counte
nances. The count, with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his be
nt arm to Marya Dmitrievna. He drew himself up, a smile of debonair gallantry lit
 up his face and as soon as the last figure of the ecossaise was ended, he clappe
d his hands to the musicians and shouted up to their gallery, addressing the firs
t violin  "Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"  This was the count's favorite 
dance, which he had danced in his youth. Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one
 figure of the anglaise.  "Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, a
nd quite forgetting that she was dancing with a grownup partner she bent her curl
y head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.  And indeed e
verybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at the jovial old gentleman,
 who standing beside his tall and stout partner, Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arm
s, beat time, straightened his shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with
 his foot, and, by a smile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared 
the onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively gay strains of
 Daniel Cooper somewhat resembling those of a merry peasant dance began to sound,
 all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenly filled by the domestic serfsthe m
en on one side and the women on the otherwho with beaming faces had come to see t
heir master making merry.  "Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loud
ly remarked the nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.  The count danced wel
l and knew it. But his partner could not and did not want to dance well. Her enor
mous figure stood erect, her powerful arms hanging down she had handed her reticu
le to the countess, and only her stern but handsome face really joined in the dan
ce. What was expressed by the whole of the count's plump figure, in Marya Dmitrie
vna found expression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose. B
ut if the count, getting more and more into the swing of it, charmed the spectato
rs by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and the agility with which he ca
pered about on his light feet, Marya Dmitrievna produced no less impression by sl
ight exertionsthe least effort to move her shoulders or bend her arms when turnin
g, or stamp her footwhich everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual s
everity. The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples could not attrac
t a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not even try to do so. All
 were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha kept pulling everyone by s
leeve or dress, urging them to "look at Papa!" though as it was they never took t
heir eyes off the couple. In the intervals of the dance the count, breathing deep
ly, waved and shouted to the musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster
 lightly, more lightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying round Mary
a Dmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels until, turning his partner round 
to her seat, he executed the final pas, raising his soft foot backwards, bowing h
is perspiring head, smiling and making a wide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder 
of applause and laughter led by Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathing hea
vily and wiping their faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.  "That's how we use
d to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.  "That was a Daniel Cooper!" e
xclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tucking up her sleeves and puffing heavily.      CHAPT
ER XXI   While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced, to a
 tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen and cooks w
ere getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke. The doctors pronounced
 recovery impossible. After a mute confession, communion was administered to the 
dying man, preparations made for the sacrament of unction, and in his house there
 was the bustle and thrill of suspense usual at such moments. Outside the house, 
beyond the gates, a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up, w
aited in expectation of an important order for an expensive funeral. The Military
 Governor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending aidesdecamp to inquire aft
er the count's health, came himself that evening to bid a last farewell to the ce
lebrated grandee of Catherine's court, Count Bezukhov.  The magnificent reception
 room was crowded. Everyone stood up respectfully when the Military Governor, hav
ing stayed about half an hour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly ackn
owledging their bows and trying to escape as quickly as possible from the glances
 fixed on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince Vasili,
 who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days, escorted him to the do
or, repeating something to him several times in low tones.  When the Military Gov
ernor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all alone on a chair in the ballroom, cros
sing one leg high over the other, leaning his elbow on his knee and covering his 
face with his hand. After sitting so for a while he rose, and, looking about him 
with frightened eyes, went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor le
ading to the back of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.  Those who we
re in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervous whispers, and, whenever anyon
e went into or came from the dying man's room, grew silent and gazed with eyes fu
ll of curiosity or expectancy at his door, which creaked slightly when opened.  "
The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed," said an old pri
est to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and was listening naively to his wo
rds.  "I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady, addin
g the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her own on the subject
.  "Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing his hand ove
r the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his bald head.  "Who was t
hat? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked at the other side of the roo
m. "How younglooking he is!"  "Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no lon
ger recognizes anyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction."  "I k
new someone who received that sacrament seven times."  The second princess had ju
st come from the sickroom with her eyes red from weeping and sat down beside Dr. 
Lorrain, who was sitting in a graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leanin
g his elbow on a table.  "Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about
 the weather. "The weather is beautiful, Princess and besides, in Moscow one feel
s as if one were in the country."  "Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sig
h. "So he may have something to drink?"  Lorrain considered.  "Has he taken his m
edicine?"  "Yes."  The doctor glanced at his watch.  "Take a glass of boiled wate
r and put a pinch of cream of tartar," and he indicated with his delicate fingers
 what he meant by a pinch.  "Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was sa
ying to an aidedecamp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."  "And what a wellpre
served man he was!" remarked the aidedecamp. "And who will inherit his wealth?" h
e added in a whisper.  "It von't go begging," replied the German with a smile.  E
veryone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the second princess went i
n with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain's instructions. The German
 doctor went up to Lorrain.  "Do you think he can last till morning?" asked the G
erman, addressing Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.  Lorrain, pursing 
up his lips, waved a severely negative finger before his nose.  "Tonight, not lat
er," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with a decorous smile of selfsatis
faction at being able clearly to understand and state the patient's condition.   
Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.  In this roo
m it was almost dark only two tiny lamps were burning before the icons and there 
was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles. The room was crowded with sm
all pieces of furniture, whatnots, cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a h
igh, white feather bed was just visible behind a screen. A small dog began to bar
k.  "Ah, is it you, cousin?"  She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual 
so extremely smooth that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and cove
red with varnish.  "Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."  "No,
 there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business, Catiche," * mutte
red the prince, seating himself wearily on the chair she had just vacated. "You h
ave made the place warm, I must say," he remarked. "Well, sit down let's have a t
alk."        *Catherine.   "I thought perhaps something had happened," she said w
ith her unchanging stonily severe expression and, sitting down opposite the princ
e, she prepared to listen.  "I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't."  "W
ell, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending it downwards as wa
s his habit.  It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they both unde
rstood without naming.  The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally 
long for her legs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in he
r prominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the icons with a
 sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow and devotion, or of 
weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince Vasili understood it as an expr
ession of weariness.  "And I?" he said "do you think it is easier for me? I am as
 worn out as a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a very
 serious talk."  Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervou
sly, now on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant expression 
which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes too seemed strange a
t one moment they looked impudently sly and at the next glanced round in alarm.  
The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bony hands, looked 
attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolved not to be the first to b
reak silence, if she had to wait till morning.  "Well, you see, my dear princess 
and cousin, Catherine Semenovna," continued Prince Vasili, returning to his theme
, apparently not without an inner struggle "at such a moment as this one must thi
nk of everything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love you all, 
like children of my own, as you know."  The princess continued to look at him wit
hout moving, and with the same dull expression.  "And then of course my family ha
s also to be considered," Prince Vasili went on, testily pushing away a little ta
ble without looking at her. "You know, Catiche, that weyou three sisters, Mamonto
v, and my wifeare the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it is fo
r you to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for me but, my dear, I am
 getting on for sixty and must be prepared for anything. Do you know I have sent 
for Pierre? The count," pointing to his portrait, "definitely demanded that he sh
ould be called."  Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could n
ot make out whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she was 
simply looking at him.  "There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon c
ousin," she replied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow 
his noble soul peacefully to leave this..."  "Yes, yes, of course," interrupted P
rince Vasili impatiently, rubbing his bald head and angrily pulling back toward h
im the little table that he had pushed away. "But... in short, the fact is... you
 know yourself that last winter the count made a will by which he left all his pr
operty, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre."  "He has made wills enough!" 
quietly remarked the princess. "But he cannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre 
is illegitimate."  "But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the lit
tle table and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly "what if a letter h
as been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre's legitimation?
 Do you understand that in consideration of the count's services, his request wou
ld be granted?..."  The princess smiled as people do who think they know more abo
ut the subject under discussion than those they are talking with.  "I can tell yo
u more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand, "that letter was written, tho
ugh it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it. The only question is, has it bee
n destroyed or not? If not, then as soon as all is over," and Prince Vasili sighe
d to intimate what he meant by the words all is over, "and the count's papers are
 opened, the will and letter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition w
ill certainly be granted. Pierre will get everything as the legitimate son."  "An
d our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if anything might happen,
 only not that.  "But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then 
be the legal heir to everything and you won't get anything. You must know, my dea
r, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they have been destroyed
 or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, you ought to know where they a
re, and must find them, because..."  "What next?" the princess interrupted, smili
ng sardonically and not changing the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and y
ou think we are all stupid but I know this an illegitimate son cannot inherit... 
un batard!" * she added, as if supposing that this translation of the word would 
effectively prove to Prince Vasili the invalidity of his contention.        * A b
astard.   "Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are so intelligent, h
ow is it you don't see that if the count has written a letter to the Emperor begg
ing him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it follows that Pierre will not be Pie
rre but will become Count Bezukhov, and will then inherit everything under the wi
ll? And if the will and letter are not destroyed, then you will have nothing but 
the consolation of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain.
"        * And all that follows therefrom.   "I know the will was made, but I als
o know that it is invalid and you, mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool
," said the princess with the expression women assume when they suppose they are 
saying something witty and stinging.  "My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," beg
an Prince Vasili impatiently, "I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk a
bout your interests as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I tell 
you for the tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre's
 favor are among the count's papers, then, my dear girl, you and your sisters are
 not heiresses! If you don't believe me, then believe an expert. I have just been
 talking to Dmitri Onufrich" the family solicitor "and he says the same."  At thi
s a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas her thin lips grew 
white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice when she began to speak pass
ed through such transitions as she herself evidently did not expect.  "That would
 be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and I don't now."  She push
ed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.  "And this is gratitudethis
 is recognition for those who have sacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried
. "It's splendid! Fine! I don't want anything, Prince."  "Yes, but you are not th
e only one. There are your sisters..." replied Prince Vasili.  But the princess d
id not listen to him.  "Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I 
could expect nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitudethe bla
ckest ingratitudein this house..."  "Do you or do you not know where that will is
?" insisted Prince Vasili, his cheeks twitching more than ever.  "Yes, I was a fo
ol! I still believed in people, loved them, and sacrificed myself. But only the b
ase, the vile succeed! I know who has been intriguing!"  The princess wished to r
ise, but the prince held her by the hand. She had the air of one who has suddenly
 lost faith in the whole human race. She gave her companion an angry glance.  "Th
ere is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it was all done casu
ally in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwards forgotten. Our duty, my
 dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease his last moments by not letting him com
mit this injustice, and not to let him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy t
hose who..."  "Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who wo
uld again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though he never cou
ld appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "I shall always remembe
r that in this world one must expect no reward, that in this world there is neith
er honor nor justice. In this world one has to be cunning and cruel."  "Now come,
 come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."  "No, I have a wicked heart."
  "I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship and wish you
 to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and let us talk sensibly
 while there is still time, be it a day or be it but an hour.... Tell me all you 
know about the will, and above all where it is. You must know. We will take it at
 once and show it to the count. He has, no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to d
estroy it. You understand that my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his
 wishes that is my only reason for being here. I came simply to help him and you.
"  "Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguingI know!" cried the princess. 
 "That's not the point, my dear."  "It's that protege of yours, that sweet Prince
ss Drubetskaya, that Anna Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... th
e infamous, vile woman!"  "Do not let us lose any time..."  "Ah, don't talk to me
! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and told the count such vile, disgrace
ful things about us, especially about SophieI can't repeat themthat it made the c
ount quite ill and he would not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it was then 
he wrote this vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid."  "We've
 got to it at lastwhy did you not tell me about it sooner?"  "It's in the inlaid 
portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said the princess, ignoring his questi
on. "Now I know! Yes if I have a sin, a great sin, it is hatred of that vile woma
n!" almost shrieked the princess, now quite changed. "And what does she come worm
ing herself in here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind. The time will co
me!"      CHAPTER XXII   While these conversations were going on in the reception
 room and the princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre who had been sent for 
and Anna Mikhaylovna who found it necessary to accompany him was driving into the
 court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softly over the straw bene
ath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned with words of comfort to her com
panion, realized that he was asleep in his corner and woke him up. Rousing himsel
f, Pierre followed Anna Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began to t
hink of the interview with his dying father which awaited him. He noticed that th
ey had not come to the front entrance but to the back door. While he was getting 
down from the carriage steps two men, who looked like tradespeople, ran hurriedly
 from the entrance and hid in the shadow of the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierr
e noticed several other men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on
 both sides. But neither Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who c
ould not help seeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be all r
ight," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly ascended th
e narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to Pierre, who was lagging behind, to
 follow. Though he did not see why it was necessary for him to go to the count at
 all, still less why he had to go by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikhayl
ovna's air of assurance and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely ne
cessary. Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who, car
rying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering. These men pressed c
lose to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna pass and did not evince the l
east surprise at seeing them there.  "Is this the way to the princesses' apartmen
ts?" asked Anna Mikhaylovna of one of them.  "Yes," replied a footman in a bold l
oud voice, as if anything were now permissible "the door to the left, ma'am."  "P
erhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached the landing. "I
'd better go to my own room."  Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come
 up.  "Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son's when 
speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less than you do, but be 
a man!"  "But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at her o
ver his spectacles.  "Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been do
ne you. Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death." She sighe
d. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to me, Pierre. I s
hall not forget your interests."  Pierre did not understand a word, but the convi
ction that all this had to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylo
vna who was already opening a door.  This door led into a back anteroom. An old m
an, a servant of the princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had 
never been in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of th
ese rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past with a decan
ter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about the princess' health and t
hen led Pierre along a stone passage. The first door on the left led into the pri
ncesses' apartments. The maid with the decanter in her haste had not closed the d
oor everything in the house was done in haste at that time, and Pierre and Anna M
ikhaylovna in passing instinctively glanced into the room, where Prince Vasili an
d the eldest princess were sitting close together talking. Seeing them pass, Prin
ce Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princess jumped up and wit
h a gesture of desperation slammed the door with all her might.  This action was 
so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on Prince Vasili's face so ou
t of keeping with his dignity that Pierre stopped and glanced inquiringly over hi
s spectacles at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled 
faintly and sighed, as if to say that this was no more than she had expected.  "B
e a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in reply to his l
ook, and went still faster along the passage.  Pierre could not make out what it 
was all about, and still less what "watching over his interests" meant, but he de
cided that all these things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, d
imly lit room adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those sumptuous
 but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach, but even in th
is room there now stood an empty bath, and water had been spilled on the carpet. 
They were met by a deacon with a censer and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe
 without heeding them. They went into the reception room familiar to Pierre, with
 two Italian windows opening into the conservatory, with its large bust and full 
length portrait of Catherine the Great. The same people were still sitting here i
n almost the same positions as before, whispering to one another. All became sile
nt and turned to look at the pale tearworn Anna Mikhaylovna as she entered, and a
t the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head, meekly followed her.  Ann
a Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive moment had arriv
ed. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now, keeping Pierre close bes
ide her, entered the room even more boldly than that afternoon. She felt that as 
she brought with her the person the dying man wished to see, her own admission wa
s assured. Casting a rapid glance at all those in the room and noticing the count
's confessor there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing
 yet seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing fir
st of one and then of another priest.  "God be thanked that you are in time," sai
d she to one of the priests "all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This you
ng man is the count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"  Hav
ing said this she went up to the doctor.  "Dear doctor," said she, "this young ma
n is the count's son. Is there any hope?"  The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards
 and silently shrugged his shoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movemen
t raised her shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved awa
y from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and tenderly sa
d voice, she said  "Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to
 sit and wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was watchi
ng and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.  Pierre, having mad
e up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved toward the sofa she had ind
icated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had disappeared he noticed that the eyes of a
ll in the room turned to him with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He 
noticed that they whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with
 a kind of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before receiv
ed was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to the priests, ro
se and offered him her seat an aidedecamp picked up and returned a glove Pierre h
ad dropped the doctors became respectfully silent as he passed by, and moved to m
ake way for him. At first Pierre wished to take another seat so as not to trouble
 the lady, and also to pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors wh
o were not even in his way but all at once he felt that this would not do, and th
at tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful rite which every
one expected of him, and that he was therefore bound to accept their services. He
 took the glove in silence from the aidedecamp, and sat down in the lady's chair,
 placing his huge hands symmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Eg
yptian statue, and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that
 in order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his own i
deas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of those who were gu
iding him.  Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erect majes
tically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three stars on his br
east. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning his eyes seemed larger th
an usual when he glanced round and noticed Pierre. He went up to him, took his ha
nd a thing he never used to do, and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain 
whether it was firmly fixed on.  "Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to se
e you. That is well!" and he turned to go.  But Pierre thought it necessary to as
k "How is..." and hesitated, not knowing whether it would be proper to call the d
ying man "the count," yet ashamed to call him "father."  "He had another stroke a
bout half an hour ago. Courage, my friend..."  Pierre's mind was in such a confus
ed state that the word "stroke" suggested to him a blow from something. He looked
 at Prince Vasili in perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an atta
ck of illness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and went throug
h the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his whole body jerked 
at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and the priests and deacons and s
ome servants also went in at the door. Through that door was heard a noise of thi
ngs being moved about, and at last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expressi
on, pale but resolute in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre light
ly on the arm said  "The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be ad
ministered. Come."  Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and 
noticed that the strange lady, the aidedecamp, and some of the servants, all foll
owed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to enter that ro
om.      CHAPTER XXIII   Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and 
an arch, its walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind t
he columns, with a high silkcurtained mahogany bedstead on one side and on the ot
her an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated with red light lik
e a Russian church during evening service. Under the gleaming icons stood a long 
invalid chair, and in that chair on snowywhite smooth pillows, evidently freshly 
changed, Pierre sawcovered to the waist by a bright green quiltthe familiar, maje
stic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of hair above his 
broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep characteristically nobl
e wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay just under the icons his large thi
ck hands outside the quilt. Into the right hand, which was lying palm downwards, 
a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, ben
ding over from behind the chair, held it in position. By the chair stood the prie
sts, their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments, with li
ghted tapers in their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the service. A little
 behind them stood the two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to their eyes
, and just in front of them their eldest sister, Catiche, with a vicious and dete
rmined look steadily fixed on the icons, as though declaring to all that she coul
d not answer for herself should she glance round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, 
sorrowful, and allforgiving expression on her face, stood by the door near the st
range lady. Prince Vasili in front of the door, near the invalid chair, a wax tap
er in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on the carved back of a velvet chai
r he had turned round for the purpose, and was crossing himself with his right ha
nd, turning his eyes upward each time he touched his forehead. His face wore a ca
lm look of piety and resignation to the will of God. "If you do not understand th
ese sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for you!"  Behind him
 stood the aidedecamp, the doctors, and the menservants the men and women had sep
arated as in church. All were silently crossing themselves, and the reading of th
e church service, the subdued chanting of deep bass voices, and in the intervals 
sighs and the shuffling of feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mi
khaylovna, with an air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew wha
t she was about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him a
 taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him, began crossing h
imself with the hand that held the taper.  Sophie, the rosy, laughterloving, youn
gest princess with the mole, watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handker
chief, and remained with it hidden for awhile then looking up and seeing Pierre s
he again began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him without laughin
g, but could not resist looking at him so to be out of temptation she slipped qui
etly behind one of the columns. In the midst of the service the voices of the pri
ests suddenly ceased, they whispered to one another, and the old servant who was 
holding the count's hand got up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovn
a stepped forward and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from behi
nd her back. The French doctor held no taper he was leaning against one of the co
lumns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spite of all dif
ferences of faith, understood the full importance of the rite now being performed
 and even approved of it. He now approached the sick man with the noiseless step 
of one in full vigor of life, with his delicate white fingers raised from the gre
en quilt the hand that was free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflecte
d a moment. The sick man was given something to drink, there was a stir around hi
m, then the people resumed their places and the service continued. During this in
terval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he had been lean
ing, andwith an air which intimated that he knew what he was about and if others 
did not understand him it was so much the worse for themdid not go up to the dyin
g man, but passed by him, joined the eldest princess, and moved with her to the s
ide of the room where stood the high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leavin
g the bed both Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, but retu
rned to their places one after the other before the service was concluded. Pierre
 paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest of what went on, havi
ng made up his mind once for all that what he saw happening around him that eveni
ng was in some way essential.  The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice 
of the priest was heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having recei
ved the sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around 
him everyone began to stir steps were audible and whispers, among which Anna Mikh
aylovna's was the most distinct.  Pierre heard her say  "Certainly he must be mov
ed onto the bed here it will be impossible..."  The sick man was so surrounded by
 doctors, princesses, and servants that Pierre could no longer see the reddishyel
low face with its gray manewhich, though he saw other faces as well, he had not l
ost sight of for a single moment during the whole service. He judged by the cauti
ous movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they had lifted t
he dying man and were moving him.  "Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he 
heard one of the servants say in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneat
h. Here!" exclaimed different voices and the heavy breathing of the bearers and t
he shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the weight they were carrying
 were too much for them.  As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed
 the young man he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the
 dying man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by those
 who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly, leonine head. Th
is head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones, its handsome, sensual mou
th, and its cold, majestic expression, was not disfigured by the approach of deat
h. It was the same as Pierre remembered it three months before, when the count ha
d sent him to Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneve
n movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon nothing.
  After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had carried the
 sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's hand and said, "Come." Pie
rre went with her to the bed on which the sick man had been laid in a stately pos
e in keeping with the ceremony just completed. He lay with his head propped high 
on the pillows. His hands were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the 
palms downward. When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but wit
h a look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal man. Either 
this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes they must look somewhere
, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated, not knowing what to do, and glanced inq
uiringly at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna made a hurried sign with her eyes, glanci
ng at the sick man's hand and moving her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, ca
refully stretching his neck so as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion
 and pressed his lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a sin
gle muscle of the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked questioningly at 
Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna Mikhaylovna with her eyes in
dicated a chair that stood beside the bed. Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes a
sking if he were doing right. Anna Mikhaylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre f
ell into the naively symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed
 that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to look
 as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still gazed at the spot where 
Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna Mikhaylovna indicated by her atti
tude her consciousness of the pathetic importance of these last moments of meetin
g between the father and son. This lasted about two minutes, which to Pierre seem
ed an hour. Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count's face began to twi
tch. The twitching increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one side only now d
id Pierre realize how near death his father was, and from that distorted mouth is
sued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively at the sick
 man's eyes, trying to guess what he wanted she pointed first to Pierre, then to 
some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an inquiring whisper, then pointed to the
 quilt. The eyes and face of the sick man showed impatience. He made an effort to
 look at the servant who stood constantly at the head of the bed.  "Wants to turn
 on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up to turn the count's heavy 
body toward the wall.  Pierre rose to help him.  While the count was being turned
 over, one of his arms fell back helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pul
l it forward. Whether he noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded th
at lifeless arm, or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at
 any rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terrorstricken face, and 
again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile appeared, quite out of 
keeping with his features, that seemed to deride his own helplessness. At sight o
f this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering in his breast and a tickling in 
his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The sick man was turned on to his side with 
his face to the wall. He sighed.  "He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observin
g that one of the princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go.
"  Pierre went out.      CHAPTER XXIV   There was now no one in the reception roo
m except Prince Vasili and the eldest princess, who were sitting under the portra
it of Catherine the Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his
 companion they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hide someth
ing as she whispered  "I can't bear the sight of that woman."  "Catiche has had t
ea served in the small drawing room," said Prince Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go
 and take something, my poor Anna Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."  To Pie
rre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeeze below the should
er. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the small drawing room.  "There is not
hing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of this delicious Russian tea
," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrained animation as he stood sipping tea
 from a delicate Chinese handleless cup before a table on which tea and a cold su
pper were laid in the small circular room. Around the table all who were at Count
 Bezukhov's house that night had gathered to fortify themselves. Pierre well reme
mbered this small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables. Durin
g balls given at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance, had liked sitti
ng in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passed through in their ball dre
sses with diamonds and pearls on their bare shoulders, looked at themselves in th
e brilliantly lighted mirrors which repeated their reflections several times. Now
 this same room was dimly lighted by two candles. On one small table tea things a
nd supper dishes stood in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley thron
g of people sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, and betraying by
 every word and movement that they none of them forgot what was happening and wha
t was about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did not eat anything though he would
 very much have liked to. He looked inquiringly at his monitress and saw that she
 was again going on tiptoe to the reception room where they had left Prince Vasil
i and the eldest princess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and aft
er a short interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside the prince
ss, and they were both speaking in excited whispers.  "Permit me, Princess, to kn
ow what is necessary and what is not necessary," said the younger of the two spea
kers, evidently in the same state of excitement as when she had slammed the door 
of her room.  "But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly but impr
essively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the other from passing, 
"won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when he needs repose? Worldly 
conversation at a moment when his soul is already prepared..."  Prince Vasili was
 seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, with one leg crossed high abov
e the other. His cheeks, which were so flabby that they looked heavier below, wer
e twitching violently but he wore the air of a man little concerned in what the t
wo ladies were saying.  "Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pl
eases. You know how fond the count is of her."  "I don't even know what is in thi
s paper," said the younger of the two ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointi
ng to an inlaid portfolio she held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will
 is in his writing table, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."  She tried to
 pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to bar her path.  "I know, my
 dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the portfolio so firmly tha
t it was plain she would not let go easily. "Dear princess, I beg and implore you
, have some pity on him! Je vous en conjure..."  The princess did not reply. Thei
r efforts in the struggle for the portfolio were the only sounds audible, but it 
was evident that if the princess did speak, her words would not be flattering to 
Anna Mikhaylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost none of i
ts honeyed firmness and softness.  "Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will n
ot be out of place in a family consultation is it not so, Prince?"  "Why don't yo
u speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loud that those in the drawin
g room heard her and were startled. "Why do you remain silent when heaven knows w
ho permits herself to interfere, making a scene on the very threshold of a dying 
man's room? Intriguer!" she hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at th
e portfolio.  But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on
 the portfolio, and changed her grip.  Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with rep
roach and surprise, "this is absurd! Come, let go I tell you."  The princess let 
go.  "And you too!"  But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.  "Let go, I tell you!
 I will take the responsibility. I myself will go and ask him, I!... does that sa
tisfy you?"  "But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament
, allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," said she, tu
rning to the young man who, having come quite close, was gazing with astonishment
 at the angry face of the princess which had lost all dignity, and at the twitchi
ng cheeks of Prince Vasili.  "Remember that you will answer for the consequences,
" said Prince Vasili severely. "You don't know what you are doing."  "Vile woman!
" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Anna Mikhaylovna and snatching th
e portfolio from her.  Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.  At 
this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long and which had al
ways opened so quietly, burst noisily open and banged against the wall, and the s
econd of the three sisters rushed out wringing her hands.  "What are you doing!" 
she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you leave me alone with him!"  Her sister 
dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping, quickly caught up the object o
f contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldest princess and Prince Vasili, rec
overing themselves, followed her. A few minutes later the eldest sister came out 
with a pale hard face, again biting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expressi
on showed an irrepressible hatred.  "Yes, now you may be glad!" said she "this is
 what you have been waiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in her
 handkerchief and rushed from the room.  Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to
 the sofa on which Pierre was sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with
 his hand. Pierre noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as
 if in an ague.  "Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow and there w
as in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in it before. 
"How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I am near sixty, dear f
riend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death is awful..." and he burst int
o tears.  Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quiet 
steps.  "Pierre!" she said.  Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the yo
ung man on his forehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said 
 "He is no more...."  Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.  "Come, I will go
 with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief as tears."  She led him into th
e dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one could see his face. Anna Mikhaylov
na left him, and when she returned he was fast asleep with his head on his arm.  
In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre  "Yes, my dear, this is a great lo
ss for us all, not to speak of you. But God will support you you are young, and a
re now, I hope, in command of an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opene
d. I know you well enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it im
poses duties on you, and you must be a man."  Pierre was silent.  "Perhaps later 
on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not been there, God only knows what
 would have happened! You know, Uncle promised me only the day before yesterday n
ot to forget Boris. But he had no time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry ou
t your father's wish?"  Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly 
looked in silence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna 
Mikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in the morning sh
e told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details of Count Bezukhov's deat
h. She said the count had died as she would herself wish to die, that his end was
 not only touching but edifying. As to the last meeting between father and son, i
t was so touching that she could not think of it without tears, and did not know 
which had behaved better during those awful momentsthe father who so remembered e
verything and everybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, or
 Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief, though h
e tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father. "It is painful, 
but it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such men as the old count and hi
s worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of the eldest princess and Prince Vasili
 she spoke disapprovingly, but in whispers and as a great secret.      CHAPTER XX
V   At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, the arrival of 
young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but this expectation did not
 upset the regular routine of life in the old prince's household. General in Chie
f Prince Nicholas Andreevich nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia" ever sin
ce the Emperor Paul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuo
usly with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle Bourienne.
 Though in the new reign he was free to return to the capitals, he still continue
d to live in the country, remarking that anyone who wanted to see him could come 
the hundred miles from Moscow to Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and n
othing. He used to say that there are only two sources of human viceidleness and 
superstition, and only two virtuesactivity and intelligence. He himself undertook
 his daughter's education, and to develop these two cardinal virtues in her gave 
her lessons in algebra and geometry till she was twenty, and arranged her life so
 that her whole time was occupied. He was himself always occupied writing his mem
oirs, solving problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, work
ing in the garden, or superintending the building that was always going on at his
 estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity, regularity in 
his household was carried to the highest point of exactitude. He always came to t
able under precisely the same conditions, and not only at the same hour but at th
e same minute. With those about him, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince w
as sharp and invariably exacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he insp
ired such fear and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he
 was in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every high offi
cial appointed to the province in which the prince's estate lay considered it his
 duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber just as the architect, gar
dener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince appeared punctually to the appointed
 hour. Everyone sitting in this antechamber experienced the same feeling of respe
ct and even fear when the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure
 of a rather small old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy gr
ay eyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd, youthf
ully glittering eyes.  On the morning of the day that the young couple were to ar
rive, Princess Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for th
e morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a silent pray
er. Every morning she came in like that, and every morning prayed that the daily 
interview might pass off well.  An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the
 antechamber rose quietly and said in a whisper "Please walk in."  Through the do
or came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidly opened the door which mo
ved noiselessly and easily. She paused at the entrance. The prince was working at
 the lathe and after glancing round continued his work.  The enormous study was f
ull of things evidently in constant use. The large table covered with books and p
lans, the tall glassfronted bookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for w
riting while standing up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe with 
tools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered aroundall indicated continuous, v
aried, and orderly activity. The motion of the small foot shod in a Tartar boot e
mbroidered with silver, and the firm pressure of the lean sinewy hand, showed tha
t the prince still possessed the tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. 
After a few more turns of the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his
 chisel, dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approaching 
the table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing, so he si
mply held out his bristly cheek as yet unshaven and, regarding her tenderly and a
ttentively, said severely  "Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the ex
ercise book containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair
 with his foot.  "For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a s
cratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.  The princess bent over 
the exercise book on the table.  "Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the 
old man suddenly, taking a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging 
above the table, onto which he threw it.  At the sight of the letter red patches 
showed themselves on the princess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head ov
er it.  "From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still 
sound, yellowish teeth.  "Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timi
d glance and a timid smile.  "I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll 
read," said the prince sternly "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read the
 third!"  "Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing still more
 and holding out the letter.  "The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abr
uptly, pushing the letter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew towar
d him the exercise book containing geometrical figures.  "Well, madam," he began,
 stooping over the book close to his daughter and placing an arm on the back of t
he chair on which she sat, so that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by th
e acrid scent of old age and tobacco, which she had known so long. "Now, madam, t
hese triangles are equal please note that the angle ABC..."  The princess looked 
in a scared way at her father's eyes glittering close to her the red patches on h
er face came and went, and it was plain that she understood nothing and was so fr
ightened that her fear would prevent her understanding any of her father's furthe
r explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the teacher's fault o
r the pupil's, this same thing happened every day the princess' eyes grew dim, sh
e could not see and could not hear anything, but was only conscious of her stern 
father's withered face close to her, of his breath and the smell of him, and coul
d think only of how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem i
n peace. The old man was beside himself moved the chair on which he was sitting n
oisily backward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not become vehem
ent, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimes flung the exer
cise book away.  The princess gave a wrong answer.  "Well now, isn't she a fool!"
 shouted the prince, pushing the book aside and turning sharply away but rising i
mmediately, he paced up and down, lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat dow
n again.  He drew up his chair, and continued to explain.  "This won't do, Prince
ss it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary, having taken and closed the exercis
e book with the next day's lesson, was about to leave "Mathematics are most impor
tant, madam! I don't want to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and y
ou'll like it," and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the nonsense out of y
our head."  She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut
 book from the high desk.  "Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your H
eloise has sent you. Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have 
looked at it. Take it. Well, now go. Go."  He patted her on the shoulder and hims
elf closed the door after her.  Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad,
 scared expression that rarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet
 plainer. She sat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits a
nd which was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy as her fa
ther was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her l
etter. It was from her most intimate friend from childhood that same Julie Karagi
na who had been at the Rostovs' nameday party.  Julie wrote in French   Dear and 
precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing is separation! Though I tell 
myself that half my life and half my happiness are wrapped up in you, and that in
 spite of the distance separating us our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds,
 my heart rebels against fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions arou
nd me I cannot overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever si
nce we parted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your big study,
 on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, as three months ago, 
draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle, calm, and penetrating, a loo
k I loved so well and seem to see before me as I write?   Having read thus far, P
rincess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror which stood on her right. It refl
ected a weak, ungraceful figure and thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked w
ith particular hopelessness at her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me," th
ought the princess, turning away and continuing to read. But Julie did not flatte
r her friend, the princess' eyeslarge, deep and luminous it seemed as if at times
 there radiated from them shafts of warm lightwere so beautiful that very often i
n spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an attraction more powerful th
an that of beauty. But the princess never saw the beautiful expression of her own
 eyesthe look they had when she was not thinking of herself. As with everyone, he
r face assumed a forced unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass. Sh
e went on reading   All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers i
s already abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march t
o the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought intends to
 expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grant that the Corsican mo
nster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be overthrown by the angel whom i
t has pleased the Almighty, in His goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say noth
ing of my brothers, this war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest m
y heart. I mean young Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to 
remain inactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess to y
ou, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the army was 
a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you last summer, is so no
bleminded and full of that real youthfulness which one seldom finds nowadays amon
g our old men of twenty and, particularly, he is so frank and has so much heart. 
He is so pure and poetic that my relations with him, transient as they were, have
 been one of the sweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered s
o much. Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then. Tha
t is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know these poignant j
oys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are generally the stronger! I 
know very well that Count Nicholas is too young ever to be more to me than a frie
nd, but this sweet friendship, this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart 
needed. But enough of this! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is th
e death of old Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesses h
ave received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is Monsieur Pierre who ha
s inherited all the property and has besides been recognized as legitimate so tha
t he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor of the finest fortune in Russia. It is r
umored that Prince Vasili played a very despicable part in this affair and that h
e returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen.  I confess I understand very little a
bout all these matters of wills and inheritance but I do know that since this you
ng man, whom we all used to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezuk
hov and the owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused to w
atch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by marriageable da
ughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward him, though, between you and 
me, he always seemed to me a poor sort of fellow. As for the past two years peopl
e have amused themselves by finding husbands for me most of whom I don't even kno
w, the matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess Be
zukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post. A propos of 
marriages do you know that a while ago that universal auntie Anna Mikhaylovna tol
d me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan of marriage for you. It is neit
her more nor less than with Prince Vasili's son Anatole, whom they wish to reform
 by marrying him to someone rich and distinguee, and it is on you that his relati
ons' choice has fallen. I don't know what you will think of it, but I consider it
 my duty to let you know of it. He is said to be very handsome and a terrible sca
pegrace. That is all I have been able to find out about him.  But enough of gossi
p. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, and Mamma has sent for me to go a
nd dine at the Apraksins'. Read the mystical book I am sending you it has an enor
mous success here. Though there are things in it difficult for the feeble human m
ind to grasp, it is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! G
ive my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle Bourie
nne. I embrace you as I love you.  JULIE  P.S. Let me have news of your brother a
nd his charming little wife.   The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smi
le and her luminous eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then s
he suddenly rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet 
of paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote, also in
 French   Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me great de
light. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of which you say so m
uch that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effect on you. You complain 
of our separation. What then should I say, if I dared complain, I who am deprived
 of all who are dear to me? Ah, if we had not religion to console us life would b
e very sad. Why do you suppose that I should look severely on your affection for 
that young man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand such f
eelings in others, and if never having felt them I cannot approve of them, neithe
r do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christian love, love of one's neigh
bor, love of one's enemy, is worthier, sweeter, and better than the feelings whic
h the beautiful eyes of a young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young gi
rl like yourself.  The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your lett
er and my father was much affected by it. He says the count was the last represen
tative but one of the great century, and that it is his own turn now, but that he
 will do all he can to let his turn come as late as possible. God preserve us fro
m that terrible misfortune!  I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as
 a child. He always seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the qual
ity I value most in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince V
asili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divine Saviour's words, t
hat it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich ma
n to enter the Kingdom of God, are terribly true. I pity Prince Vasili but am sti
ll more sorry for Pierre. So young, and burdened with such richesto what temptati
ons he will be exposed! If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be 
to be poorer than the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the vol
ume you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since you tell me 
that among some good things it contains others which our weak human understanding
 cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend time in reading what is uni
ntelligible and can therefore bear no fruit. I never could understand the fondnes
s some people have for confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that m
erely awaken their doubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for ex
aggeration quite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistle
s and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain for how c
an we, miserable sinners that we are, know the terrible and holy secrets of Provi
dence while we remain in this flesh which forms an impenetrable veil between us a
nd the Eternal? Let us rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules w
hich our divine Saviour has left for our guidance here below. Let us try to confo
rm to them and follow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeb
le human minds roam, the better we shall please God, who rejects all knowledge th
at does not come from Him and the less we seek to fathom what He has been pleased
 to conceal from us, the sooner will He vouchsafe its revelation to us through Hi
s divine Spirit.  My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told m
e that he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili. In r
egard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweet friend, tha
t I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must conform. However pa
inful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay the duties of wife and mother upon
 me I shall try to perform them as faithfully as I can, without disquieting mysel
f by examining my feelings toward him whom He may give me for husband.  I have ha
d a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival at Bald Hills with h
is wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one, however, for he will leave, us ag
ain to take part in this unhappy war into which we have been drawn, God knows how
 or why. Not only where you areat the heart of affairs and of the worldis the tal
k all of war, even here amid fieldwork and the calm of naturewhich townsfolk cons
ider characteristic of the countryrumors of war are heard and painfully felt. My 
father talks of nothing but marches and countermarches, things of which I underst
and nothing and the day before yesterday during my daily walk through the village
 I witnessed a heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from
 our people and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state of the 
mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and should have heard the 
sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the laws of its divine Saviour, Wh
o preached love and forgiveness of injuriesand that men attribute the greatest me
rit to skill in killing one another.  Adieu, dear and kind friend may our divine 
Saviour and His most Holy Mother keep you in their holy and allpowerful care!  MA
RY   "Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatched mine.
 I have written to my poor mother," said the smiling Mademoiselle Bourienne rapid
ly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's. She brought into Princess
 Mary's strenuous, mournful, and gloomy world a quite different atmosphere, carel
ess, lighthearted, and selfsatisfied.  "Princess, I must warn you," she added, lo
wering her voice and evidently listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking w
ith exaggerated grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich. He
 is in a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."  "Ah, dear friend," replied P
rincess Mary, "I have asked you never to warn me of the humor my father is in. I 
do not allow myself to judge him and would not have others do so."  The princess 
glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minutes late in starting her p
ractice on the clavichord, went into the sitting room with a look of alarm. Betwe
en twelve and two o'clock, as the day was mapped out, the prince rested and the p
rincess played the clavichord.      CHAPTER XXVI   The grayhaired valet was sitti
ng drowsily listening to the snoring of the prince, who was in his large study. F
rom the far side of the house through the closed doors came the sound of difficul
t passagestwenty times repeatedof a sonata by Dussek.  Just then a closed carriag
e and another with a hood drove up to the porch. Prince Andrew got out of the car
riage, helped his little wife to alight, and let her pass into the house before h
im. Old Tikhon, wearing a wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, r
eported in a whisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door. T
ikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual event must be all
owed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince Andrew apparently knew thi
s as well as Tikhon he looked at his watch as if to ascertain whether his father'
s habits had changed since he was at home last, and, having assured himself that 
they had not, he turned to his wife.  "He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us g
o across to Mary's room," he said.  The little princess had grown stouter during 
this time, but her eyes and her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began t
o speak just as merrily and prettily as ever.  "Why, this is a palace!" she said 
to her husband, looking around with the expression with which people compliment t
heir host at a ball. "Let's come, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smi
led at Tikhon, at her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.  "Is that
 Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise."  Prince Andrew foll
owed her with a courteous but sad expression.  "You've grown older, Tikhon," he s
aid in passing to the old man, who kissed his hand.  Before they reached the room
 from which the sounds of the clavichord came, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoma
n, Mademoiselle Bourienne, rushed out apparently beside herself with delight.  "A
h! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she "At last! I must let her know."  "No
, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the little princess, ki
ssing her. "I know you already through my sisterinlaw's friendship for you. She w
as not expecting us?"  They went up to the door of the sitting room from which ca
me the sound of the oftrepeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and 
made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.  The little princess entere
d the room. The passage broke off in the middle, a cry was heard, then Princess M
ary's heavy tread and the sound of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two pr
incesses, who had only met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in e
ach other's arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to to
uch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her heart, with 
a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to laugh. Prince Andrew sh
rugged his shoulders and frowned, as lovers of music do when they hear a false no
te. The two women let go of one another, and then, as if afraid of being too late
, seized each other's hands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began 
kissing each other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began t
o cry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. Prince Andrew e
vidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quite natural that they
 should cry, and apparently it never entered their heads that it could have been 
otherwise at this meeting.  "Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, 
and then laughed. "I dreamed last night...""You were not expecting us?..." "Ah! M
ary, you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."  "I knew the prin
cess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.  "And I had no idea!..." exclaimed 
Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did not see you."  Prince Andrew and his sister, ha
nd in hand, kissed one another, and he told her she was still the same crybaby as
 ever. Princess Mary had turned toward her brother, and through her tears the lov
ing, warm, gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,
 rested on Prince Andrew's face.  The little princess talked incessantly, her sho
rt, downy upper lip continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when nec
essary and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of glitt
ering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they had had on the Spass
ki Hill which might have been serious for her in her condition, and immediately a
fter that informed them that she had left all her clothes in Petersburg and that 
heaven knew what she would have to dress in here and that Andrew had quite change
d, and that Kitty Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor f
or Mary, a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was st
ill looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full of love and 
sadness. It was plain that she was following a train of thought independent of he
r sisterinlaw's words. In the midst of a description of the last Petersburg fete 
she addressed her brother  "So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said
 sighing.  Lise sighed too.  "Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.  "He 
is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have had promotion..."  Princess
 Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of thought turned to he
r sisterinlaw with a tender glance at her figure.  "Is it certain?" she said.  Th
e face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said "Yes, quite certain. A
h! it is very dreadful..."  Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her 
sisterinlaw's and unexpectedly again began to cry.  "She needs rest," said Prince
 Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise? Take her to your room and I'll go to Fath
er. How is he? Just the same?"  "Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what you
r opinion will be," answered the princess joyfully.  "And are the hours the same?
 And the walks in the avenues? And the lathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcel
y perceptible smile which showed that, in spite of all his love and respect for h
is father, he was aware of his weaknesses.  "The hours are the same, and the lath
e, and also the mathematics and my geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefull
y, as if her lessons in geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.  W
hen the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old prince to ge
t up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father. The old man made a depa
rture from his usual routine in honor of his son's arrival he gave orders to admi
t him to his apartments while he dressed for dinner. The old prince always dresse
d in oldfashioned style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair and when Princ
e Andrew entered his father's dressing room not with the contemptuous look and ma
nner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with which he talked to
 Pierre, the old man was sitting on a large leathercovered chair, wrapped in a po
wdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tikhon.  "Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to
 vanquish Buonaparte?" said the old man, shaking his powdered head as much as the
 tail, which Tikhon was holding fast to plait, would allow.  "You at least must t
ackle him properly, or else if he goes on like this he'll soon have us, too, for 
his subjects! How are you?" And he held out his cheek.  The old man was in a good
 temper after his nap before dinner. He used to say that a nap "after dinner was 
silverbefore dinner, golden." He cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from und
er his thick, bushy eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the 
spot indicated to him. He made no reply on his father's favorite topicmaking fun 
of the military men of the day, and more particularly of Bonaparte.  "Yes, Father
, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant," said Prince Andrew, fo
llowing every movement of his father's face with an eager and respectful look. "H
ow is your health?"  "Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me I am bus
y from morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."  "Thank God," 
said his son smiling.  "God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued
, returning to his hobby "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonapa
rte by this new science you call 'strategy.'"  Prince Andrew smiled.  "Give me ti
me to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile that showed that his father
's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and honoring him. "Why, I have not
 yet had time to settle down!"  "Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking 
his pigtail to see whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. "
The house for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show her 
over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's way! I am glad
 to have her. Sit down and talk. About Mikhelson's army I understandTolstoy's too
... a simultaneous expedition.... But what's the southern army to do? Prussia is 
neutral... I know that. What about Austria?" said he, rising from his chair and p
acing up and down the room followed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing him dif
ferent articles of clothing. "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"  Pr
ince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, beganat first reluctantly, but grad
ually with more and more animation, and from habit changing unconsciously from Ru
ssian to French as he went onto explain the plan of operation for the coming camp
aign. He explained how an army, ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia s
o as to bring her out of her neutrality and draw her into the war how part of tha
t army was to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund how two hundred and twenty th
ousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate in Italy and 
on the Rhine how fifty thousand Russians and as many English were to land at Napl
es, and how a total force of five hundred thousand men was to attack the French f
rom different sides. The old prince did not evince the least interest during this
 explanation, but as if he were not listening to it continued to dress while walk
ing about, and three times unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouti
ng "The white one, the white one!"  This meant that Tikhon was not handing him th
e waistcoat he wanted. Another time he interrupted, saying  "And will she soon be
 confined?" and shaking his head reproachfully said "That's bad! Go on, go on."  
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his description. The
 old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age "Malbrook s'en vaten guer
re. Dieu sait quand reviendra." *        * "Marlborough is going to the wars God 
knows when he'll      return."   His son only smiled.  "I don't say it's a plan I
 approve of," said the son "I am only telling you what it is. Napoleon has also f
ormed his plan by now, not worse than this one."  "Well, you've told me nothing n
ew," and the old man repeated, meditatively and rapidly  "Dieu sait quand reviend
ra. Go to the dining room."      CHAPTER XXVII   At the appointed hour the prince
, powdered and shaven, entered the dining room where his daughterinlaw, Princess 
Mary, and Mademoiselle Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his arch
itect, who by a strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though th
e position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly not have 
caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept very strictly to 
social distinctions and rarely admitted even important government officials to hi
s table, had unexpectedly selected Michael Ivanovich who always went into a corne
r to blow his nose on his checked handkerchief to illustrate the theory that all 
men are equals, and had more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Iva
novich was "not a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually spoke t
o the taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.  In the dining r
oom, which like all the rooms in the house was exceedingly lofty, the members of 
the household and the footmenone behind each chairstood waiting for the prince to
 enter. The head butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, ma
king signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door by w
hich the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large gilt frame, ne
w to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes Bolkonski, opposite whi
ch hung another such frame with a badly painted portrait evidently by the hand of
 the artist belonging to the estate of a ruling prince, in a crownan alleged desc
endant of Rurik and ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at t
hat genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at a po
rtrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.  "How thoroughly like 
him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had come up to him.  Princess Mary lo
oked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand what he was laughing at. 
Everything her father did inspired her with reverence and was beyond question.  "
Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, with his power
ful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"  Princess Mary could not understand the bo
ldness of her brother's criticism and was about to reply, when the expected foots
teps were heard coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily 
as was his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners wit
h the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock struck two an
d another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing room. The prince stood st
ill his lively glittering eyes from under their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly sca
nned all present and rested on the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do whe
n the Tsar enters, the sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired i
n all around him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back o
f her neck.  "I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into her 
eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sit down! Sit d
own, Michael Ianovich!"  He indicated a place beside him to his daughterinlaw. A 
footman moved the chair for her.  "Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on
 her rounded figure. "You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"  He laughed in his usu
al dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only and not with his eyes.  "You mus
t walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.  The little prin
cess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was silent and seemed confu
sed. The prince asked her about her father, and she began to smile and talk. He a
sked about mutual acquaintances, and she became still more animated and chattered
 away giving him greetings from various people and retailing the town gossip.  "C
ountess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has cried her eyes ou
t," she said, growing more and more lively.  As she became animated the prince lo
oked at her more and more sternly, and suddenly, as if he had studied her suffici
ently and had formed a definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael
 Ivanovich.  "Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of
 it. Prince Andrew" he always spoke thus of his son "has been telling me what for
ces are being collected against him! While you and I never thought much of him." 
 Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said such things abou
t Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on which to hang the p
rince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at the young prince, wondering what
 would follow.  "He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing t
o the architect.  And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and
 the generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not only 
that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A B C of war or
 of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant little Frenchy, successful 
only because there were no longer any Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him bu
t he was also convinced that there were no political difficulties in Europe and n
o real war, but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playi
ng, pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his father's r
idicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him with evident pleasure
.  "The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself fall into 
a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how to escape?"  "Who told 
you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerked away his plate, which 
Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider, Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and
 Suvorov Moreau!... Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free h
and but he had the HofskriegswurstschnappsRath on his hands. It would have puzzle
d the devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those Hofskriegswurs
tRaths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so what chance has Michael Kutuzov? No, 
my dear boy," he continued, "you and your generals won't get on against Buonapart
e you'll have to call in the French, so that birds of a feather may fight togethe
r. The German, Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchm
an, Moreau," he said, alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau to ente
r the Russian service.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins, Suvorovs, and Orlovs
 Germans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost your wits, or I have outlived
 mine. May God help you, but we'll see what will happen. Buonaparte has become a 
great commander among them! Hm!..."  "I don't at all say that all the plans are g
ood," said Prince Andrew, "I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You 
may laugh as much as you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great general!"  "
Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busy with his roas
t meat, hoped he had been forgotten "Didn't I tell you Buonaparte was a great tac
tician? Here, he says the same thing."  "To be sure, your excellency," replied th
e architect.  The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.  "Buonaparte was born wi
th a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got splendid soldiers. Besides he began by
 attacking Germans. And only idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the wo
rld began everybody has beaten the Germans. They beat no oneexcept one another. H
e made his reputation fighting them."  And the prince began explaining all the bl
unders which, according to him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in p
olitics. His son made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments we
re presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He listen
ed, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this old man, living 
alone in the country for so many years, could know and discuss so minutely and ac
utely all the recent European military and political events.  "You think I'm an o
ld man and don't understand the present state of affairs?" concluded his father. 
"But it troubles me. I don't sleep at night. Come now, where has this great comma
nder of yours shown his skill?" he concluded.  "That would take too long to tell,
" answered the son.  "Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, h
ere's another admirer of that powdermonkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed in exc
ellent French.  "You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"  "Dieu sait quand rev
iendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with a laugh still more so, he quit
ted the table.  The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of t
he dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her fatherinlaw and 
now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she took her sisterinlaw's arm and
 drew her into another room.  "What a clever man your father is," said she "perha
ps that is why I am afraid of him."  "Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.
      CHAPTER XXVIII   Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, n
ot altering his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was i
n her sisterinlaw's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without epaulettes ha
d been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him. After inspecting the 
carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, he ordered the horses to be harnes
sed. Only those things he always kept with him remained in his room a small box, 
a large canteen fitted with silver plate, two Turkish pistols and a sabera presen
t from his father who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov. All these traveli
ng effects of Prince Andrew's were in very good order new, clean, and in cloth co
vers carefully tied with tapes.  When starting on a journey or changing their mod
e of life, men capable of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At
 such moments one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's face
 looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he paced briskly fr
om corner to corner of the room, looking straight before him and thoughtfully sha
king his head. Did he fear going to the war, or was he sad at leaving his wife?pe
rhaps both, but evidently he did not wish to be seen in that mood, for hearing fo
otsteps in the passage he hurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if
 tying the cover of the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrabl
e expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.  "I hear you
 have given orders to harness," she cried, panting she had apparently been runnin
g, "and I did so wish to have another talk with you alone! God knows how long we 
may again be parted. You are not angry with me for coming? You have changed so, A
ndrusha," she added, as if to explain such a question.  She smiled as she uttered
 his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviously strange to her to think that this ste
rn handsome man should be Andrushathe slender mischievous boy who had been her pl
ayfellow in childhood.  "And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question onl
y by a smile.  "She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my roo
m. Oh, Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down on the
 sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child such a dear, merry child. I have
 grown so fond of her."  Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the i
ronical and contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.  "One must be indul
gent to little weaknesses who is free from them, Andrew? Don't forget that she ha
s grown up and been educated in society, and so her position now is not a rosy on
e. We should enter into everyone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonn
er. * Think what it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to,
 to be parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in her condition
! It's very hard."        * To understand all is to forgive all.   Prince Andrew 
smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we think we thoroughly un
derstand.  "You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replie
d.  "I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life, and can
't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew for a young society woman to be buried
 in the country during the best years of her life, all alonefor Papa is always bu
sy, and I... well, you know what poor resources I have for entertaining a woman u
sed to the best society. There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne...."  "I don't like
 your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew.  "No? She is very nice 
and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied. She has no one, no one. To tell
 the truth, I don't need her, and she's even in my way. You know I always was a s
avage, and now am even more so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much
. She and Michael Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and ki
nd, because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says 'We don't love 
people so much for the good they have done us, as for the good we have done them.
' Father took her when she was homeless after losing her own father. She is very 
goodnatured, and my father likes her way of reading. She reads to him in the even
ings and reads splendidly."  "To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's characte
r sometimes makes things trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenl
y.  Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.  "For me?
 For me?... Trying for me!..." said she.  "He always was rather harsh and now I s
hould think he's getting very trying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking li
ghtly of their father in order to puzzle or test his sister.  "You are good in ev
ery way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectual pride," said the princess, f
ollowing the train of her own thoughts rather than the trend of the conversation"
and that's a great sin. How can one judge Father? But even if one might, what fee
ling except veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so contented
 and happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I am."  Her brother sho
ok his head incredulously.  "The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell yo
u the truth, Andrew... is Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don't un
derstand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is as clear as d
ay, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing that makes me unhappy. But e
ven in this I can see lately a shade of improvement. His satire has been less bit
ter of late, and there was a monk he received and had a long talk with."  "Ah! my
 dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder," said Prince Andrew
 banteringly yet tenderly.  "Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hea
r me. Andrew..." she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor
 to ask of you."  "What is it, dear?"  "Nopromise that you will not refuse! It wi
ll give you no trouble and is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Pr
omise, Andrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yet takin
g out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were the subject of her
 request and must not be shown before the request was granted.  She looked timidl
y at her brother.  "Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince A
ndrew, as if guessing what it was about.  "Think what you please! I know you are 
just like Father. Think as you please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father
's father, our grandfather, wore it in all his wars." She still did not take out 
what she was holding in her reticule. "So you promise?"  "Of course. What is it?"
  "Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you will never take
 it off. Do you promise?"  "If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break 
my neck... To please you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing the pa
ined expression his joke had brought to his sister's face, he repented and added 
"I am glad really, dear, I am very glad."  "Against your will He will save and ha
ve mercy on you and bring you to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," s
aid she in a voice trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands befo
re her brother a small, oval, antique, darkfaced icon of the Saviour in a gold se
tting, on a finely wrought silver chain.  She crossed herself, kissed the icon, a
nd handed it to Andrew.  "Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."  Rays of gentle light 
shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit up the whole of her thin, sickly
 face and made it beautiful. Her brother would have taken the icon, but she stopp
ed him. Andrew understood, crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look 
of tenderness, for he was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face.  "Thank
 you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat down again on the sofa. Th
ey were silent for a while.  "As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generou
s as you always used to be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is so swee
t, so goodnatured, and her position now is a very hard one."  "I do not think I h
ave complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamed her. Why do you say all this t
o me?"  Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as if she
 felt guilty.  "I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to. 
And I am sorry for that," he went on.  The patches grew deeper on her forehead, n
eck, and cheeks. She tried to say something but could not. Her brother had guesse
d right the little princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her fo
rebodings about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of he
r fate, her fatherinlaw, and her husband. After crying she had fallen asleep. Pri
nce Andrew felt sorry for his sister.  "Know this, Masha I can't reproach, have n
ot reproached, and never shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot repro
ach myself with anything in regard to her and that always will be so in whatever 
circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... if you want t
o know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why this is so I don't know.
.."  As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed her foreh
ead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, and unaccustomed brightness,
 but he was looking not at his sister but over her head toward the darkness of th
e open doorway.  "Let us go to her, I must say goodby. Orgo and wake and I'll com
e in a moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet "Come here, take these away. Pu
t this on the seat and this to the right."  Princess Mary rose and moved to the d
oor, then stopped and said "Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God
 and asked Him to give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have b
een answered."  "Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha I'll come immediat
ely."  On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connected one wing w
ith the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling sweetly. It was t
he third time that day that, with an ecstatic and artless smile, she had met him 
in secluded passages.  "Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some 
reason blushing and dropping her eyes.  Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and a
n expression of anger suddenly came over his face. He said nothing to her but loo
ked at her forehead and hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempt tha
t the Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached his siste
r's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurrying one word after 
another, came through the open door. She was speaking as usual in French, and as 
if after long selfrestraint she wished to make up for lost time.  "No, but imagin
e the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and her mouth full of false teeth, as
 if she were trying to cheat old age.... Ha, ha, ha! Mary!"  This very sentence a
bout Countess Zubova and this same laugh Prince Andrew had already heard from his
 wife in the presence of others some five times. He entered the room softly. The 
little princess, plump and rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work in he
r hands, talking incessantly, repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases
. Prince Andrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested after the
ir journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.  The coach with six horse
s was waiting at the porch. It was an autumn night, so dark that the coachman cou
ld not see the carriage pole. Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the p
orch. The immense house was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windo
ws. The domestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid goodby to the yo
ung prince. The members of the household were all gathered in the reception hall 
Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess Mary, and the little princess
. Prince Andrew had been called to his father's study as the latter wished to say
 goodby to him alone. All were waiting for them to come out.  When Prince Andrew 
entered the study the old man in his oldage spectacles and white dressing gown, i
n which he received no one but his son, sat at the table writing. He glanced roun
d.  "Going?" And he went on writing.  "I've come to say goodby."  "Kiss me here,"
 and he touched his cheek "Thanks, thanks!"  "What do you thank me for?"  "For no
t dillydallying and not hanging to a woman's apron strings. The Service before ev
erything. Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writing, so that his quill spluttered a
nd squeaked. "If you have anything to say, say it. These two things can be done t
ogether," he added.  "About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your
 hands..."  "Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."  "When her confinement is due
, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Let him be here...."  The old prince stopp
ed writing and, as if not understanding, fixed his stern eyes on his son.  "I kno
w that no one can help if nature does not do her work," said Prince Andrew, evide
ntly confused. "I know that out of a million cases only one goes wrong, but it is
 her fancy and mine. They have been telling her things. She has had a dream and i
s frightened."  "Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what 
he was writing. "I'll do it."  He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to 
his son began to laugh.  "It's a bad business, eh?"  "What is bad, Father?"  "The
 wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.  "I don't understand!" sa
id Prince Andrew.  "No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all l
ike that one can't unmarry. Don't be afraid I won't tell anyone, but you know it 
yourself."  He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, look
ed straight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see through him, a
nd again laughed his frigid laugh.  The son sighed, thus admitting that his fathe
r had understood him. The old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatchin
g up and throwing down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapi
dity.  "What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make your mind eas
y," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.  Andrew did not speak h
e was both pleased and displeased that his father understood him. The old man got
 up and gave the letter to his son.  "Listen!" said he "don't worry about your wi
fe what can be done shall be. Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilarionovic
h. * I have written that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep 
you long as an adjutant a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him. Write a
nd tell me how he receives you. If he is all rightserve him. Nicholas Bolkonski's
 son need not serve under anyone if he is in disfavor. Now come here."        *Ku
tuzov.   He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his son w
as accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised the lid, drew out
 a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with his bold, tall, close handwr
iting.  "I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs hand 
them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond and a letter it is
 a premium for the man who writes a history of Suvorov's wars. Send it to the Aca
demy. Here are some jottings for you to read when I am gone. You will find them u
seful."  Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time y
et. He felt that he must not say it.  "I will do it all, Father," he said.  "Well
, now, goodby!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embraced him. "Remember thi
s, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me, your old father..." he paused
 unexpectedly, and then in a querulous voice suddenly shrieked "but if I hear tha
t you have not behaved like a son of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"  "Y
ou need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with a smile.  The old ma
n was silent.  "I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm kille
d and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from youas I said yesterday..
. let him grow up with you.... Please."  "Not let the wife have him?" said the ol
d man, and laughed.  They stood silent, facing one another. The old man's sharp e
yes were fixed straight on his son's. Something twitched in the lower part of the
 old prince's face.  "We've said goodby. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angr
y voice, opening his door.  "What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they s
aw for a moment at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a whit
e dressing gown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.  Prince Andr
ew sighed and made no reply.  "Well!" he said, turning to his wife.  And this "We
ll!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying, "Now go through your performanc
e."  "Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale and looking with d
ismay at her husband.  He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his 
shoulder.  He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her fac
e, and carefully placed her in an easy chair.  "Adieu, Mary," said he gently to h
is sister, taking her by the hand and kissing her, and then he left the room with
 rapid steps.  The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne ch
afing her temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sisterinlaw, still looked with h
er beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which Prince Andrew had gone 
and made the sign of the cross in his direction. From the study, like pistol shot
s, came the frequent sound of the old man angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Pr
ince Andrew gone when the study door opened quickly and the stern figure of the o
ld man in the white dressing gown looked out.  "Gone? That's all right!" said he 
and looking angrily at the unconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovi
ngly and slammed the door.      BOOK TWO 1805      CHAPTER I   In October, 1805, 
a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns of the Archduchy of Austria, 
and yet other regiments freshly arriving from Russia were settling near the fortr
ess of Braunau and burdening the inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau
 was the headquarters of the commanderinchief, Kutuzov.  On October 11, 1805, one
 of the infantry regiments that had just reached Braunau had halted half a mile f
rom the town, waiting to be inspected by the commander in chief. Despite the unRu
ssian appearance of the locality and surroundingsfruit gardens, stone fences, til
ed roofs, and hills in the distanceand despite the fact that the inhabitants who 
gazed with curiosity at the soldiers were not Russians, the regiment had just the
 appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for an inspection anywhere in the h
eart of Russia.  On the evening of the last day's march an order had been receive
d that the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Though the
 words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, and the question 
arose whether the troops were to be in marching order or not, it was decided at a
 consultation between the battalion commanders to present the regiment in parade 
order, on the principle that it is always better to "bow too low than not bow low
 enough." So the soldiers, after a twentymile march, were kept mending and cleani
ng all night long without closing their eyes, while the adjutants and company com
manders calculated and reckoned, and by morning the regimentinstead of the stragg
ling, disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the day beforepresented a we
llordered array of two thousand men each of whom knew his place and his duty, had
 every button and every strap in place, and shone with cleanliness. And not only 
externally was all in order, but had it pleased the commander in chief to look un
der the uniforms he would have found on every man a clean shirt, and in every kna
psack the appointed number of articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers say
. There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be at ease. It wa
s the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's boots were in holes.
 But this defect was not due to any fault of the regimental commander, for in spi
te of repeated demands boots had not been issued by the Austrian commissariat, an
d the regiment had marched some seven hundred miles.  The commander of the regime
nt was an elderly, choleric, stout, and thickset general with grizzled eyebrows a
nd whiskers, and wider from chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a 
brandnew uniform showing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epau
lettes which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. He ha
d the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties of his life. 
He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulled himself up, slightl
y arching his back. It was plain that the commander admired his regiment, rejoice
d in it, and that his whole mind was engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to ind
icate that, besides military matters, social interests and the fair sex occupied 
no small part of his thoughts.  "Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressing
 one of the battalion commanders who smilingly pressed forward it was plain that 
they both felt happy. "We had our hands full last night. However, I think the reg
iment is not a bad one, eh?"  The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony 
and laughed.  "It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow.
"  "What?" asked the commander.  At that moment, on the road from the town on whi
ch signalers had been posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aidede
camp followed by a Cossack.  The aidedecamp was sent to confirm the order which h
ad not been clearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander in chief wi
shed to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on the march in t
heir greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparation whatever.  A member of th
e Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the day before with proposals and
 demands for him to join up with the army of the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and
 Kutuzov, not considering this junction advisable, meant, among other arguments i
n support of his view, to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which t
he troops arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the regiment 
so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander in chief w
ould be. Though the aidedecamp did not know these circumstances, he nevertheless 
delivered the definite order that the men should be in their greatcoats and in ma
rching order, and that the commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On
 hearing this the regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoul
ders, and spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.  "A fine mess we've made o
f it!" he remarked.  "There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it w
as said 'on the march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully to the batt
alion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping resolutely forward. "Company co
mmanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed to command. "Sergeants major!... How 
soon will he be here?" he asked the aidedecamp with a respectful politeness evide
ntly relating to the personage he was referring to.  "In an hour's time, I should
 say."  "Shall we have time to change clothes?"  "I don't know, General...."  The
 regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered the soldiers to chan
ge into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran off to their companies, the 
sergeants major began bustling the greatcoats were not in very good condition, an
d instantly the squares that had up to then been in regular order and silent bega
n to sway and stretch and hum with voices. On all sides soldiers were running to 
and fro, throwing up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling t
he straps over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves o
n with upraised arms.  In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares h
ad become gray instead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky s
teps to the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance.  "Whatever is 
this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commander of the third company!"  "Comm
ander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander to the general... 
third company to the commander." The words passed along the lines and an adjutant
 ran to look for the missing officer.  When the eager but misrepeated words had r
eached their destination in a cry of "The general to the third company," the miss
ing officer appeared from behind his company and, though he was a middleaged man 
and not in the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his toes toward t
he general. The captain's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who is told t
o repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his nose, the redness of 
which was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouth twitched nervously. The ge
neral looked the captain up and down as he came up panting, slackening his pace a
s he approached.  "You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this
?" shouted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and pointing at a 
soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluish cloth, which c
ontrasted with the others. "What have you been after? The commander in chief is e
xpected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teach you to dress the men in fancy co
ats for a parade.... Eh...?"  The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed o
n his superior, pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in th
is pressure lay his only hope of salvation.  "Well, why don't you speak? Whom hav
e you got there dressed up as a Hungarian?" said the commander with an austere gi
be.  "Your excellency..."  "Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But wha
t about your excellency?... nobody knows."  "Your excellency, it's the officer Do
lokhov, who has been reduced to the ranks," said the captain softly.  "Well? Has 
he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier? If a soldier, he should
 be dressed in regulation uniform like the others."  "Your excellency, you gave h
im leave yourself, on the march."  "Gave him leave? Leave? That's just like you y
oung men," said the regimental commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed....
 One says a word to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I be
g you to dress your men decently."  And the commander, turning to look at the adj
utant, directed his jerky steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his ow
n display of anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse
 for wrath. Having snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge, at another beca
use his line was not straight, he reached the third company.  "Hoow are you stand
ing? Where's your leg? Your leg?" shouted the commander with a tone of suffering 
in his voice, while there were still five men between him and Dolokhov with his b
luishgray uniform.  Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight 
with his clear, insolent eyes in the general's face.  "Why a blue coat? Off with 
it... Sergeant major! Change his coat... the ras..." he did not finish.  "General
, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..." Dolokhov hurriedly interru
pted.  "No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!"  "Not bound to endur
e insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringing tones.  The eyes of the general a
nd the soldier met. The general became silent, angrily pulling down his tight sca
rf.  "I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said as he turn
ed away.      CHAPTER II   "He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.  T
he regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrup with trem
bling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself, drew his saber, a
nd with a happy and resolute countenance, opening his mouth awry, prepared to sho
ut. The regiment fluttered like a bird preening its plumage and became motionless
.  "Attention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soulshaking voice which exp
ressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and welcome for the approachin
g chief.  Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high
, light blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springs and drawn by six 
horses at a smart trot. Behind the caleche galloped the suite and a convoy of Cro
ats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general, in a white uniform that looked stran
ge among the Russian black ones. The caleche stopped in front of the regiment. Ku
tuzov and the Austrian general were talking in low voices and Kutuzov smiled slig
htly as treading heavily he stepped down from the carriage just as if those two t
housand men breathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did not exist
.  The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with a jingl
ing sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the feeble voice of the c
ommander in chief was heard. The regiment roared, "Health to your ex... len... le
n... lency!" and again all became silent. At first Kutuzov stood still while the 
regiment moved then he and the general in white, accompanied by the suite, walked
 between the ranks.  From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander 
in chief and devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and fro
m the way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forward and ha
rdly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way he darted forward at 
every word or gesture of the commander in chief, it was evident that he performed
 his duty as a subordinate with even greater zeal than his duty as a commander. T
hanks to the strictness and assiduity of its commander the regiment, in compariso
n with others that had reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid conditio
n. There were only 217 sick and stragglers. Everything was in good order except t
he boots.  Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a few frie
ndly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimes also to the sol
diers. Looking at their boots he several times shook his head sadly, pointing the
m out to the Austrian general with an expression which seemed to say that he was 
not blaming anyone, but could not help noticing what a bad state of things it was
. The regimental commander ran forward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a s
ingle word of the commander in chief's regarding the regiment. Behind Kutuzov, at
 a distance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followed some twen
ty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselves and sometimes laughe
d. Nearest of all to the commander in chief walked a handsome adjutant. This was 
Prince Bolkonski. Beside him was his comrade Nesvitski, a tall staff officer, ext
remely stout, with a kindly, smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvitski cou
ld hardly keep from laughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked besi
de him. This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a change in the exp
ression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental commander's back and mimicked h
is every movement. Each time the commander started and bent forward, the hussar s
tarted and bent forward in exactly the same manner. Nesvitski laughed and nudged 
the others to make them look at the wag.  Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly pas
t thousands of eyes which were starting from their sockets to watch their chief. 
On reaching the third company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected
 this, involuntarily came closer to him.  "Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing th
e rednosed captain who had been reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.  On
e would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself more than Timokhi
n had done when he was reprimanded by the regimental commander, but now that the 
commander in chief addressed him he drew himself up to such an extent that it see
med he could not have sustained it had the commander in chief continued to look a
t him, and so Kutuzov, who evidently understood his case and wished him nothing b
ut good, quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over his scar
red and puffy face.  "Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are you
 satisfied with him?" he asked the regimental commander.  And the latterunconscio
us that he was being reflected in the hussar officer as in a looking glassstarted
, moved forward, and answered "Highly satisfied, your excellency!"  "We all have 
our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smiling and walking away from him. "He used to have
 a predilection for Bacchus."  The regimental commander was afraid he might be bl
amed for this and did not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of t
he rednosed captain and his drawnin stomach, and mimicked his expression and pose
 with such exactitude that Nesvitski could not help laughing. Kutuzov turned roun
d. The officer evidently had complete control of his face, and while Kutuzov was 
turning managed to make a grimace and then assume a most serious, deferential, an
d innocent expression.  The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, app
arently trying to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among t
he suite and said in French  "You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, 
reduced to the ranks in this regiment."  "Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.  Dol
okhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat, did not wait to b
e called. The shapely figure of the fairhaired soldier, with his clear blue eyes,
 stepped forward from the ranks, went up to the commander in chief, and presented
 arms.  "Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown.  "This
 is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew.  "Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a le
sson to you. Do your duty. The Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if yo
u deserve well."  The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just as bo
ldly as they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expression 
to tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander in chief so widely
 from a private.  "One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm
, ringing, deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my fault and prov
e my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"  Kutuzov turned away. Th
e same smile of the eyes with which he had turned from Captain Timokhin again fli
tted over his face. He turned away with a grimace as if to say that everything Do
lokhov had said to him and everything he could say had long been known to him, th
at he was weary of it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and we
nt to the carriage.  The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their ap
pointed quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes and 
to rest after their hard marches.  "You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?
" said the regimental commander, overtaking the third company on its way to its q
uarters and riding up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front. The regimenta
l commander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed with irrepress
ible delight. "It's in the Emperor's service... it can't be helped... one is some
times a bit hasty on parade... I am the first to apologize, you know me!... He wa
s very pleased!" And he held out his hand to the captain.  "Don't mention it, Gen
eral, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the captain, his nose growing redder as he g
ave a smile which showed where two front teeth were missing that had been knocked
 out by the butt end of a gun at Ismail.  "And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't for
get himhe may be quite easy. And tell me, pleaseI've been meaning to askhow is he
 behaving himself, and in general..."  "As far as the service goes he is quite pu
nctilious, your excellency but his character..." said Timokhin.  "And what about 
his character?" asked the regimental commander.  "It's different on different day
s," answered the captain. "One day he is sensible, well educated, and goodnatured
, and the next he's a wild beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a
 Jew."  "Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander. "Still, one must hav
e pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has important connections... Wel
l, then, you just..."  "I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showing by his s
mile that he understood his commander's wish.  "Well, of course, of course!"  The
 regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reining in his horse,
 said to him  "After the next affair... epaulettes."  Dolokhov looked round but d
id not say anything, nor did the mocking smile on his lips change.  "Well, that's
 all right," continued the regimental commander. "A cup of vodka for the men from
 me," he added so that the soldiers could hear. "I thank you all! God be praised!
" and he rode past that company and overtook the next one.  "Well, he's really a 
good fellow, one can serve under him," said Timokhin to the subaltern beside him.
  "In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing the regimental comman
der was nicknamed King of Hearts.  The cheerful mood of their officers after the 
inspection infected the soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voi
ces could be heard on every side.  "And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?" 
 "And so he is! Quite blind!"  "No, friend, he is sharpereyed than you are. Boots
 and leg bands... he noticed everything..."  "When he looked at my feet, friend..
. well, thinks I..."  "And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he
 were smeared with chalkas white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they d
o the guns."  "I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You 
were near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."  "Buonapar
te himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know! The Prussians are u
p in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are putting them down. When they've been p
ut down, the war with Buonaparte will begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau
! Shows you're a fool. You'd better listen more carefully!"  "What devils these q
uartermasters are! See, the fifth company is turning into the village already... 
they will have their buckwheat cooked before we reach our quarters."  "Give me a 
biscuit, you devil!"  "And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, fri
end! Ah, well, never mind, here you are."  "They might call a halt here or we'll 
have to do another four miles without eating."  "Wasn't it fine when those German
s gave us lifts! You just sit still and are drawn along."  "And here, friend, the
 people are quite beggarly. There they all seemed to be Polesall under the Russia
n crownbut here they're all regular Germans."  "Singers to the front" came the ca
ptain's order.  And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. A 
drummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishing his arm, 
began a longdrawnout soldiers' song, commencing with the words "Morning dawned, t
he sun was rising," and concluding "On then, brothers, on to glory, led by Father
 Kamenski." This song had been composed in the Turkish campaign and now being sun
g in Austria, the only change being that the words "Father Kamenski" were replace
d by "Father Kutuzov."  Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and wav
ed his arms as if flinging something to the ground, the drummera lean, handsome s
oldier of fortylooked sternly at the singers and screwed up his eyes. Then having
 satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raised both arms as if car
efully lifting some invisible but precious object above his head and, holding it 
there for some seconds, suddenly flung it down and began  "Oh, my bower, oh, my b
ower...!"  "Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet playe
r, in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front and, walking 
backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders and flourished his castanets a
s if threatening someone. The soldiers, swinging their arms and keeping time spon
taneously, marched with long steps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, the c
reaking of springs, and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard. Kutuzov and his su
ite were returning to the town. The commander in chief made a sign that the men s
hould continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showed pleasure at the 
sound of the singing and the sight of the dancing soldier and the gay and smartly
 marching men. In the second file from the right flank, beside which the carriage
 passed the company, a blueeyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Do
lokhov marching with particular grace and boldness in time to the song and lookin
g at those driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that moment marching 
with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite who had mimicked the regim
ental commander, fell back from the carriage and rode up to Dolokhov.  Hussar cor
net Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to the wild set led by Dolok
hov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a private and had not seen fit to recogni
ze him. But now that Kutuzov had spoken to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him
 with the cordiality of an old friend.  "My dear fellow, how are you?" said he th
rough the singing, making his horse keep pace with the company.  "How am I?" Dolo
khov answered coldly. "I am as you see."  The lively song gave a special flavor t
o the tone of free and easy gaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intention
al coldness of Dolokhov's reply.  "And how do you get on with the officers?" inqu
ired Zherkov.  "All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled onto 
the staff?"  "I was attached I'm on duty."  Both were silent.  "She let the hawk 
fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went the song, arousing an involuntary se
nsation of courage and cheerfulness. Their conversation would probably have been 
different but for the effect of that song.  "Is it true that Austrians have been 
beaten?" asked Dolokhov.  "The devil only knows! They say so."  "I'm glad," answe
red Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the song demanded.  "I say, come round some 
evening and we'll have a game of faro!" said Zherkov.  "Why, have you too much mo
ney?"  "Do come."  "I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till
 I get reinstated."  "Well, that's only till the first engagement."  "We shall se
e."  They were again silent.  "Come if you need anything. One can at least be of 
use on the staff..."  Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won'
t begI'll take it!"  "Well, never mind I only..."  "And I only..."  "Goodby."  "G
ood health..."          "It's a long, long way.         To my native land..."   Z
herkov touched his horse with the spurs it pranced excitedly from foot to foot un
certain with which to start, then settled down, galloped past the company, and ov
ertook the carriage, still keeping time to the song.      CHAPTER III   On return
ing from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general into his private room and,
 calling his adjutant, asked for some papers relating to the condition of the tro
ops on their arrival, and the letters that had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, 
who was in command of the advanced army. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into the ro
om with the required papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath
 were sitting at the table on which a plan was spread out.  "Ah!..." said Kutuzov
 glancing at Bolkonski as if by this exclamation he was asking the adjutant to wa
it, and he went on with the conversation in French.  "All I can say, General," sa
id he with a pleasant elegance of expression and intonation that obliged one to l
isten to each deliberately spoken word. It was evident that Kutuzov himself liste
ned with pleasure to his own voice. "All I can say, General, is that if the matte
r depended on my personal wishes, the will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis wou
ld have been fulfilled long ago. I should long ago have joined the archduke. And 
believe me on my honour that to me personally it would be a pleasure to hand over
 the supreme command of the army into the hands of a better informed and more ski
llful generalof whom Austria has so manyand to lay down all this heavy responsibi
lity. But circumstances are sometimes too strong for us, General."  And Kutuzov s
miled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite at liberty not to believe me an
d I don't even care whether you do or not, but you have no grounds for telling me
 so. And that is the whole point."  The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but
 had no option but to reply in the same tone.  "On the contrary," he said, in a q
uerulous and angry tone that contrasted with his flattering words, "on the contra
ry, your excellency's participation in the common action is highly valued by His 
Majesty but we think the present delay is depriving the splendid Russian troops a
nd their commander of the laurels they have been accustomed to win in their battl
es," he concluded his evidently prearranged sentence.  Kutuzov bowed with the sam
e smile.  "But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with which H
is Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that the Austrian tr
oops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as General Mack, have by now al
ready gained a decisive victory and no longer need our aid," said Kutuzov.  The g
eneral frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austrian defeat, there we
re many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumors that were afloat, and so 
Kutuzov's suggestion of an Austrian victory sounded much like irony. But Kutuzov 
went on blandly smiling with the same expression, which seemed to say that he had
 a right to suppose so. And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack's
 army informed him of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army
 was very favorable.  "Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andre
w. "Please have a look at it"and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the corners
 of his mouth read to the Austrian general the following passage, in German, from
 the Archduke Ferdinand's letter   We have fully concentrated forces of nearly se
venty thousand men with which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the 
Lech. Also, as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage of c
ommanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not cross the Lech, 
we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line of communications, recross t
he river lower down, and frustrate his intention should he try to direct his whol
e force against our faithful ally. We shall therefore confidently await the momen
t when the Imperial Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conju
nction with it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves. 
  Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at the member of t
he Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.  "But you know the wise maxim your excel
lency, advising one to expect the worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wi
shing to have done with jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked ro
und at the aidedecamp.  "Excuse me, General," interrupted Kutuzov, also turning t
o Prince Andrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reports f
rom our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is one from His 
Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said, handing him several
 papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of all this, showing all the news 
we have had of the movements of the Austrian army, and then give it to his excell
ency."  Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the first
 not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have liked to tell him. 
He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both, stepped softly over the carpet 
and went out into the waiting room.  Though not much time had passed since Prince
 Andrew had left Russia, he had changed greatly during that period. In the expres
sion of his face, in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his
 former affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time to 
think of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied with agreeable and in
teresting work. His face expressed more satisfaction with himself and those aroun
d him, his smile and glance were brighter and more attractive.  Kutuzov, whom he 
had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly, promised not to forget him
, distinguished him above the other adjutants, and had taken him to Vienna and gi
ven him the more serious commissions. From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrad
e, Prince Andrew's father.   Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguishe
d by his industry, firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have 
such a subordinate by me.   On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in 
the army generally, Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two q
uite opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be different fro
m themselves and from everyone else, expected great things of him, listened to hi
m, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince Andrew was natural and pleasan
t. Others, the majority, disliked him and considered him conceited, cold, and dis
agreeable. But among these people Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so tha
t they respected and even feared him.  Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the wait
ing room with the papers in his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the ai
dedecamp on duty, Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.  "Well, P
rince?" asked Kozlovski.  "I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we a
re not advancing."  "And why is it?"  Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.  "Any
 news from Mack?"  "No."  "If it were true that he has been beaten, news would ha
ve come."  "Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.  But at t
hat instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with the order of Maria There
sa on his neck and a black bandage round his head, who had evidently just arrived
, entered quickly, slamming the door. Prince Andrew stopped short.  "Commander in
 Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general speaking quickly with a harsh Ger
man accent, looking to both sides and advancing straight toward the inner door.  
"The commander in chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedly up to the un
known general and blocking his way to the door. "Whom shall I announce?"  The unk
nown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who was rather short, as if s
urprised that anyone should not know him.  "The commander in chief is engaged," r
epeated Kozlovski calmly.  The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trem
bled. He took out a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out t
he leaf, gave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himself i
nto a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, "Why do they look at me?" 
Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as if he intended to say something, b
ut immediately, with affected indifference, began to hum to himself, producing a 
queer sound which immediately broke off. The door of the private room opened and 
Kutuzov appeared in the doorway. The general with the bandaged head bent forward 
as though running away from some danger, and, making long, quick strides with his
 thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.  "Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a
 broken voice.  Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly
 immobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave and his 
forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully, closed his eyes, si
lently let Mack enter his room before him, and closed the door himself behind him
.  The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten and th
at the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct. Within half an hou
r adjutants had been sent in various directions with orders which showed that the
 Russian troops, who had hitherto been inactive, would also soon have to meet the
 enemy.  Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest 
lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard the details of
 his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost, understood all the d
ifficulties of the Russian army's position, and vividly imagined what awaited it 
and the part he would have to play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at t
he thought of the humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's time he mi
ght, perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the French si
nce Suvorov met them. He feared that Bonaparte's genius might outweigh all the co
urage of the Russian troops, and at the same time could not admit the idea of his
 hero being disgraced.  Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew wen
t toward his room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corr
idor he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkov they were 
as usual laughing.  "Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew
's pale face and glittering eyes.  "There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bo
lkonski.  Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward them
 from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general who on Kutuzov'
s staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army, and the member of the 
Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening. There was room enough in the 
wide corridor for the generals to pass the three officers quite easily, but Zherk
ov, pushing Nesvitski aside with his arm, said in a breathless voice,  "They're c
oming!... they're coming!... Stand aside, make way, please make way!"  The genera
ls were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoid embarrassing attentions. O
n the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly appeared a stupid smile of glee whic
h he seemed unable to suppress.  "Your excellency," said he in German, stepping f
orward and addressing the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you
."  He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the other, aw
kwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.  The member of the Hofkriegsrath looke
d at him severely but, seeing the seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but 
give him a moment's attention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listeni
ng.  "I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived, quite well,
 only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing with a beaming smile to his
 head.  The general frowned, turned away, and went on.  "Gott, wie naiv!" * said 
he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.        * "Good God, what simplicity!" 
  Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but Bolkonski, turni
ng still paler, pushed him away with an angry look and turned to Zherkov. The ner
vous irritation aroused by the appearance of Mack, the news of his defeat, and th
e thought of what lay before the Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkov's un
timely jest.  "If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharpl
y, with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doing so but I
 warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, I will teach you to b
ehave yourself."  Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that t
hey gazed at Bolkonski silently with wideopen eyes.  "What's the matter? I only c
ongratulated them," said Zherkov.  "I am not jesting with you please be silent!" 
cried Bolkonski, and taking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know wha
t to say.  "Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying to soothe
 him.  "What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his excitem
ent. "Don't you understand that either we are officers serving our Tsar and our c
ountry, rejoicing in the successes and grieving at the misfortunes of our common 
cause, or we are merely lackeys who care nothing for their master's business. Qua
rante mille hommes massacres et l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez l
a le mot pour rire," * he said, as if strengthening his views by this French sent
ence. "C'est bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu dont vous avez fait u
n ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous. *2 Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himse
lf in this way," he added in Russianbut pronouncing the word with a French accent
having noticed that Zherkov could still hear him.        * "Forty thousand men ma
ssacred and the army of our allies      destroyed, and you find that a cause for 
jesting!"       * 2 "It is all very well for that goodfornothing fellow      of w
hom you have made a friend, but not for you, not for      you."   He waited a mom
ent to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turned and went out of the cor
ridor.      CHAPTER IV   The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Brau
nau. The squadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in the
 German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village were assigned to c
avalrycaptain Denisov, the squadron commander, known throughout the whole cavalry
 division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet Rostov, ever since he had overtaken the regimen
t in Poland, had lived with the squadron commander.  On October 11, the day when 
all was astir at headquarters over the news of Mack's defeat, the camp life of th
e officers of this squadron was proceeding as usual. Denisov, who had been losing
 at cards all night, had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the mor
ning from a foraging expedition. Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to his 
horse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a supple youthful
 movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to part from his horse,
 and at last sprang down and called to his orderly.  "Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend
!" said he to the hussar who rushed up headlong to the horse. "Walk him up and do
wn, my dear fellow," he continued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodh
earted young people show to everyone when they are happy.  "Yes, your excellency,
" answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his head.  "Mind, walk him up and down we
ll!"  Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had already thr
own the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse's head. It was evident that th
e cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to serve him. Rostov patted th
e horse's neck and then his flank, and lingered for a moment.  "Splendid! What a 
horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, and holding up his saber, his spurs j
ingling, he ran up the steps of the porch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a
 pointed cap, pitchfork in hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked ou
t, and his face immediately brightened on seeing Rostov. "Schon gut Morgen! Schon
 gut Morgen!" * he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased to greet th
e young man.       * "A very good morning! A very good morning!"   "Schon fleissi
g?" * said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile which did not leave his eager
 face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser Alexander hoch!" *2 said he, quotin
g words often repeated by the German landlord.       * "Busy already?"      * 2 "
Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians!      Hurrah for Emperor Alexan
der!"   The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, and wavi
ng it above his head cried  "Und die ganze Welt hoch!" *       * "And hurrah for 
the whole world!"   Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried
 laughing, "Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the German cleaning his cow
shed nor Rostov back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any reason for re
joicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight and brotherly love, wagged
 their heads in token of their mutual affection, and parted smiling, the German r
eturning to his cowshed and Rostov going to the cottage he occupied with Denisov.
  "What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whom all the r
egiment knew for a rogue.  "Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losi
ng," answered Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to brag a
bout it, but if he stays out till morning it means he's lost and will come back i
n a rage. Will you have coffee?"  "Yes, bring some."  Ten minutes later Lavrushka
 brought the coffee. "He's coming!" said he. "Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out
 of the window and saw Denisov coming home. Denisov was a small man with a red fa
ce, sparkling black eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an unfaste
ned cloak, wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a crumpled shako on the bac
k of his head. He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging his head.  "Lavwuska!" h
e shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!"  "Well, I am taking it of
f," replied Lavrushka's voice.  "Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, entering t
he room.  "Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and have
 seen Fraulein Mathilde."  "Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterd
ay like a damned fool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's. "Such ill luck! S
uch ill luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo there! Tea!"  Puck
ering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strong teeth, he began wi
th stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thick tangled black hair.  "And 
what devil made me go to that wat?" an officer nicknamed "the rat" he said, rubbi
ng his forehead and whole face with both hands. "Just fancy, he didn't let me win
 a single cahd, not one cahd."  He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him,
 gripped it in his fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while
 he continued to shout.  "He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as o
ne doubles it gives the singles and snatches the doubles!"  He scattered the burn
ing tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away. Then he remained silent for a w
hile, and all at once looked cheerfully with his glittering, black eyes at Rostov
.  "If at least we had some women here but there's nothing foh one to do but dwin
k. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who's there?" he said, turning t
o the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and the clinking of spurs that came
 to a stop, and a respectful cough.  "The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka
.  Denisov's face puckered still more.  "Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a p
urse with some gold in it. "Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left 
and shove the purse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the quartermaster
.  Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coins in sep
arate piles, began counting them.  "Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me la
st night," came Denisov's voice from the next room.  "Where? At Bykov's, at the r
at's... I knew it," replied a piping voice, and Lieutenant Telyanin, a small offi
cer of the same squadron, entered the room.  Rostov thrust the purse under the pi
llow and shook the damp little hand which was offered him. Telyanin for some reas
on had been transferred from the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved ver
y well in the regiment but was not liked Rostov especially detested him and was u
nable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man.  "Well, young c
avalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. Rook was a young horse Telyanin ha
d sold to Rostov.  The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straigh
t in the face his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.  "I saw y
ou riding this morning..." he added.  "Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answere
d Rostov, though the horse for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not wo
rth half that sum. "He's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," he added
.  "The hoof's cracked! That's nothing. I'll teach you what to do and show you wh
at kind of rivet to use."  "Yes, please do," said Rostov.  "I'll show you, I'll s
how you! It's not a secret. And it's a horse you'll thank me for."  "Then I'll ha
ve it brought round," said Rostov wishing to avoid Telyanin, and he went out to g
ive the order.  In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the thresho
ld facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostov, Denisov s
crewed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with his thumb to the room wher
e Telyanin was sitting, he frowned and gave a shudder of disgust.  "Ugh! I don't 
like that fellow," he said, regardless of the quartermaster's presence.  Rostov s
hrugged his shoulders as much as to say "Nor do I, but what's one to do?" and, ha
ving given his order, he returned to Telyanin.  Telyanin was sitting in the same 
indolent pose in which Rostov had left him, rubbing his small white hands.  "Well
 there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as he entered.  "Have you
 told them to bring the horse?" asked Telyanin, getting up and looking carelessly
 about him.  "I have."  "Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov ab
out yesterday's order. Have you got it, Denisov?"  "Not yet. But where are you of
f to?"  "I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.  The
y went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenant explained how to riv
et the hoof and went away to his own quarters.  When Rostov went back there was a
 bottle of vodka and a sausage on the table. Denisov was sitting there scratching
 with his pen on a sheet of paper. He looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said "
I am witing to her."  He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand 
and, evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted to write, 
told Rostov the contents of his letter.  "You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep
 when we don't love. We are childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one
 is a God, one is pua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send hi
m to the devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in the
 least abashed.  "Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's the quart
ermaster for the money."  Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but s
topped.  "Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in the puh
se?" he asked, turning to Rostov.  "Seven new and three old imperials."  "Oh, it'
s wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you sca'cwow? Call the quahtehm
asteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.  "Please, Denisov, let me lend you some I have s
ome, you know," said Rostov, blushing.  "Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows
, I don't," growled Denisov.  "But if you won't accept money from me like a comra
de, you will offend me. Really I have some," Rostov repeated.  "No, I tell you." 
 And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.  "Where have
 you put it, Wostov?"  "Under the lower pillow."  "It's not there."  Denisov thre
w both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.  "That's a miwacle."  "Wait
, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the pillows one at a time and 
shaking them.  He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.  "D
ear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept it under your
 head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it just here. Where is it?" he asked,
 turning to Lavrushka.  "I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it.
"  "But it isn't?..."  "You're always like that you thwow a thing down anywhere a
nd forget it. Feel in your pockets."  "No, if I hadn't thought of it being a trea
sure," said Rostov, "but I remember putting it there."  Lavrushka turned all the 
bedding over, looked under the bed and under the table, searched everywhere, and 
stood still in the middle of the room. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movem
ents, and when the latter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to 
be found Denisov glanced at Rostov.  "Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy t
wicks..."  Rostov felt Denisov's gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and instantl
y dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested somewhere below hi
s throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not draw breath.  "And there hasn'
t been anyone in the room except the lieutenant and yourselves. It must be here s
omewhere," said Lavrushka.  "Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt fo
r it!" shouted Denisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with a th
reatening gesture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flog you, I'll flog you all."  
Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckled on his saber
, and put on his cap.  "I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, sha
king his orderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.  "Denisov, l
et him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, going toward the door withou
t raising his eyes. Denisov paused, thought a moment, and, evidently understandin
g what Rostov hinted at, seized his arm.  "Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on 
his forehead and neck stood out like cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't all
ow it. The purse is here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found." 
 "I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, and went to the
 door.  "And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushing at th
e cadet to restrain him.  But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger 
as though Denisov were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his fac
e.  "Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a trembling voice. "There 
was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it is not so, then..."  He 
could not finish, and ran out of the room.  "Ah, may the devil take you and evewy
body," were the last words Rostov heard.  Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.  "T
he master is not in, he's gone to headquarters," said Telyanin's orderly. "Has so
mething happened?" he added, surprised at the cadet's troubled face.  "No, nothin
g."  "You've only just missed him," said the orderly.  The headquarters were situ
ated two miles away from Salzeneck, and Rostov, without returning home, took a ho
rse and rode there. There was an inn in the village which the officers frequented
. Rostov rode up to it and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.  In the second room
 of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish of sausages and a bottle of wi
ne.  "Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling and raising his eyeb
rows.  "Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word and he
 sat down at the nearest table.  Both were silent. There were two Germans and a R
ussian officer in the room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatt
er of knives and the munching of the lieutenant.  When Telyanin had finished his 
lunch he took out of his pocket a double purse and, drawing its rings aside with 
his small, white, turnedup fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eye
brows gave it to the waiter.  "Please be quick," he said.  The coin was a new one
. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.  "Allow me to look at your purse," he said
 in a low, almost inaudible, voice.  With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised
, Telyanin handed him the purse.  "Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, gr
owing suddenly pale, and added, "Look at it, young man."  Rostov took the purse i
n his hand, examined it and the money in it, and looked at Telyanin. The lieutena
nt was looking about in his usual way and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.  "I
f we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in these wretched little towns th
ere's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well, let me have it, young man, I'm going.
"  Rostov did not speak.  "And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed yo
u quite decently here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."  He stret
ched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let go of it. Telyanin took t
he purse and began carelessly slipping it into the pocket of his riding breeches,
 with his eyebrows lifted and his mouth slightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I
 am putting my purse in my pocket and that's quite simple and is no one else's bu
siness."  "Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted brows
 he glanced into Rostov's eyes.  Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Tel
yanin's eyes to Rostov's and back, and back again and again in an instant.  "Come
 here," said Rostov, catching hold of Telyanin's arm and almost dragging him to t
he window. "That money is Denisov's you took it..." he whispered just above Telya
nin's ear.  "What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.  But these words cam
e like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty for pardon. As soon as Rostov he
ard them, an enormous load of doubt fell from him. He was glad, and at the same i
nstant began to pity the miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had 
begun had to be completed.  "Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine,"
 muttered Telyanin, taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. "We m
ust have an explanation..."  "I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.  "I..."
  Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, his eyes still
 shifted from side to side but with a downward look not rising to Rostov's face, 
and his sobs were audible.  "Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this 
wretched money, take it..." He threw it on the table. "I have an old father and m
other!..."  Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of the 
room without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced his steps. "O G
od," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?"  "Count..." said Tely
anin drawing nearer to him.  "Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you
 need it, take the money," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn. 
     CHAPTER V   That same evening there was an animated discussion among the squ
adron's officers in Denisov's quarters.  "And I tell you, Rostov, that you must a
pologize to the colonel!" said a tall, grizzlyhaired staff captain, with enormous
 mustaches and many wrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson wit
h excitement.  The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks fo
r affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.  "I will allow no one t
o call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me I lied, and I told him he lied. And 
there it rests. He may keep me on duty every day, or may place me under arrest, b
ut no one can make me apologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, th
inks it beneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then..."  "You just wait a m
oment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted the staff captain in his deep bas
s, calmly stroking his long mustache. "You tell the colonel in the presence of ot
her officers that an officer has stolen..."  "I'm not to blame that the conversat
ion began in the presence of other officers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken b
efore them, but I am not a diplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinking
 that here one would not need finesse and he tells me that I am lyingso let him g
ive me satisfaction..."  "That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that'
s not the point. Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to
 demand satisfaction of his regimental commander?"  Denisov sat gloomily biting h
is mustache and listening to the conversation, evidently with no wish to take par
t in it. He answered the staff captain's question by a disapproving shake of his 
head.  "You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before other officers,
" continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" the colonel was called Bogdanich "
shuts you up."  "He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth."  "Well
, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and must apologize."  "Not 
on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.  "I did not expect this of you," said the staf
f captain seriously and severely. "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's no
t only to him but to the whole regimentall of usyou're to blame all round. The ca
se is this you ought to have thought the matter over and taken advice but no, you
 go and blurt it all straight out before the officers. Now what was the colonel t
o do? Have the officer tried and disgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole 
regiment because of one scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it li
ke that. And Bogdanich was a brick he told you you were saying what was not true.
 It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear fellow? You landed yourself in
 it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, some conceit prevents your
 apologizing, and you wish to make the whole affair public. You are offended at b
eing put on duty a bit, but why not apologize to an old and honorable officer? Wh
atever Bogdanich may be, anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You're 
quick at taking offense, but you don't mind disgracing the whole regiment!" The s
taff captain's voice began to tremble. "You have been in the regiment next to no 
time, my lad, you're here today and tomorrow you'll be appointed adjutant somewhe
re and can snap your fingers when it is said 'There are thieves among the Pavlogr
ad officers!' But it's not all the same to us! Am I not right, Denisov? It's not 
the same!"  Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked wit
h his glittering black eyes at Rostov.  "You value your own pride and don't wish 
to apologize," continued the staff captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown u
p in and, God willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of th
e regiment, and Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! And all this 
is not right, it's not right! You may take offense or not but I always stick to m
other truth. It's not right!"  And the staff captain rose and turned away from Ro
stov.  "That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumping up. "Now then, Wost
ov, now then!"   Rostov, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one of
ficer and then at the other.  "No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite 
understand. You're wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of t
he regiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me the honor of the
 flag... Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame, to blame all round. Well, what
 else do you want?..."  "Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, tur
ning round and clapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.  "I tell you," 
shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow."  "That's better, Count," said the staff ca
ptain, beginning to address Rostov by his title, as if in recognition of his conf
ession. "Go and apologize, your excellency. Yes, go!"  "Gentlemen, I'll do anythi
ng. No one shall hear a word from me," said Rostov in an imploring voice, "but I 
can't apologize, by God I can't, do what you will! How can I go and apologize lik
e a little boy asking forgiveness?"  Denisov began to laugh.  "It'll be worse for
 you. Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll pay for your obstinacy," said Kirsten.  
"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling. I can't..."  "W
ell, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has become of that scou
ndrel?" he asked Denisov.  "He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off t
he list tomowwow," muttered Denisov.  "It is an illness, there's no other way of 
explaining it," said the staff captain.  "Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss m
y path. I'd kill him!" shouted Denisov in a bloodthirsty tone.  Just then Zherkov
 entered the room.  "What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the new
comer.  "We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his whole 
army."  "It's not true!"  "I've seen him myself!"  "What? Saw the real Mack? With
 hands and feet?"  "Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! B
ut how did you come here?"  "I've been sent back to the regiment all on account o
f that devil, Mack. An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on 
Mack's arrival... What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd just come out o
f a hot bath."  "Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two day
s."  The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by Zherkov. T
hey were under orders to advance next day.  "We're going into action, gentlemen!"
  "Well, thank God! We've been sitting here too long!"      CHAPTER VI   Kutuzov 
fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over the rivers Inn at
 Braunau and Traun near Linz. On October 23 the Russian troops were crossing the 
river Enns. At midday the Russian baggage train, the artillery, and columns of tr
oops were defiling through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.  It was 
a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened out before the heights 
on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the bridge was at times veiled by a
 diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, and then, suddenly spread out in the sunlig
ht, fardistant objects could be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnish
ed. Down below, the little town could be seen with its white, redroofed houses, i
ts cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed jostling masses of 
Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island, and a castle with 
a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of the Enns and the Danube beca
me visible, and the rocky left bank of the Danube covered with pine forests, with
 a mystic background of green treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a conven
t stood out beyond a wild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of t
he Enns the enemy's horse patrols could be discerned.  Among the field guns on th
e brow of the hill the general in command of the rearguard stood with a staff off
icer, scanning the country through his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski
, who had been sent to the rearguard by the commander in chief, was sitting on th
e trail of a gun carriage. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsac
k and a flask, and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real doppelku
mmel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on their knees, some squatting
 Turkish fashion on the wet grass.  "Yes, the Austrian prince who built that cast
le was no fool. It's a fine place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" N
esvitski was saying.  "Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers
, pleased to be talking to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovely pla
ce! We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a splendid house!"  
"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to take another pie but
 felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining the countryside"See, our infan
trymen have already got there. Look there in the meadow behind the village, three
 of them are dragging something. They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with e
vident approval.  "So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like," a
dded he, munching a pie in his moistlipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip in o
ver there."  He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed
 and gleamed.  "That would be fine, gentlemen!"  The officers laughed.  "Just to 
flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls among them. On my word I
'd give five years of my life for it!"  "They must be feeling dull, too," said on
e of the bolder officers, laughing.  Meanwhile the staff officer standing in fron
t pointed out something to the general, who looked through his field glass.  "Yes
, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the field glass and shr
ugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at the crossing. And why are
 they dawdling there?"  On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked
 eye, and from their battery a milkwhite cloud arose. Then came the distant repor
t of a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.  Nesvitski ro
se, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.  "Would not your excellency lik
e a little refreshment?" he said.  "It's a bad business," said the general withou
t answering him, "our men have been wasting time."  "Hadn't I better ride over, y
our excellency?" asked Nesvitski.  "Yes, please do," answered the general, and he
 repeated the order that had already once been given in detail "and tell the huss
ars that they are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered and the infla
mmable material on the bridge must be reinspected."  "Very good," answered Nesvit
ski.  He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsack and
 flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.  "I'll really call in 
on the nuns," he said to the officers who watched him smilingly, and he rode off 
by the winding path down the hill.  "Now then, let's see how far it will carry, C
aptain. Just try!" said the general, turning to an artillery officer. "Have a lit
tle fun to pass the time."  "Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.  In a mo
ment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began loading.  "One!" c
ame the command.  Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafen
ing metallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our troops bel
ow the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smoke showing the spot wher
e it burst.  The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone g
ot up and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainly visible as
 if but a stone's throw away, and the movements of the approaching enemy farther 
off. At the same instant the sun came fully out from behind the clouds, and the c
lear sound of the solitary shot and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged 
in a single joyous and spirited impression.      CHAPTER VII   Two of the enemy's
 shots had already flown across the bridge, where there was a crush. Halfway acro
ss stood Prince Nesvitski, who had alighted from his horse and whose big body was
 jammed against the railings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a 
few steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince Nesvit
ski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back again and pressed him ag
ainst the railings, and all he could do was to smile.  "What a fine fellow you ar
e, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoy soldier with a wagon, who was pressing o
nto the infantrymen who were crowded together close to his wheels and his horses.
 "What a fellow! You can't wait a moment! Don't you see the general wants to pass
?"  But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted at the sol
diers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to the left! Wait a bit." 
But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder to shoulder, their bayonets interlock
ing, moved over the bridge in a dense mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Ne
svitski saw the rapid, noisy little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying
 round the piles of the bridge chased each other along. Looking on the bridge he 
saw equally uniform living waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos, kn
apsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and, under the shakos, faces with broad cheekbon
es, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, and feet that moved through th
e sticky mud that covered the planks of the bridge. Sometimes through the monoton
ous waves of men, like a fleck of white foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer
, in a cloak and with a type of face different from that of the men, squeezed his
 way along sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot
, an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry and sometim
es like a log floating down the river, an officers' or company's baggage wagon, p
iled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides, moved across the bridge. 
 "It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are there many more 
of you to come?"  "A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn co
at, with a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.  "If he" he meant
 the enemy "begins popping at the bridge now," said the old soldier dismally to a
 comrade, "you'll forget to scratch yourself."  That soldier passed on, and after
 him came another sitting on a cart.  "Where the devil have the leg bands been sh
oved to?" said an orderly, running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it
.  And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers who had ev
idently been drinking.  "And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with
 the butt end of his gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said ga
ily, with a wide swing of his arm.  "Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered
 another with a loud laugh. And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not l
earn who had been struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.  "Bah! 
How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll all be killed," a se
rgeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.  "As it flies past me, Daddy, the ba
ll I mean," said a young soldier with an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from l
aughing, "I felt like dying of fright. I did, 'pon my word, I got that frightened
!" said he, as if bragging of having been frightened.  That one also passed. Then
 followed a cart unlike any that had gone before. It was a German cart with a pai
r of horses led by a German, and seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. 
A fine brindled cow with a large udder was attached to the cart behind. A woman w
ith an unweaned baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red che
eks were sitting on some feather beds. Evidently these fugitives were allowed to 
pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiers turned toward the women,
 and while the vehicle was passing at foot pace all the soldiers' remarks related
 to the two young ones. Every face bore almost the same smile, expressing unseeml
y thoughts about the women.  "Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!
"  "Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German, who, angry 
and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast eyes.  "See how smart sh
e's made herself! Oh, the devils!"  "There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on t
hem!"  "I have seen as much before now, mate!"  "Where are you going?" asked an i
nfantry officer who was eating an apple, also half smiling as he looked at the ha
ndsome girl.  The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand. 
 "Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.  The girl smi
led and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on the bridge did not take hi
s eyes off the women till they had passed. When they had gone by, the same stream
 of soldiers followed, with the same kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As of
ten happens, the horses of a convoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge
, and the whole crowd had to wait.  "And why are they stopping? There's no proper
 order!" said the soldiers. "Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you 
wait? It'll be worse if he fires the bridge. See, here's an officer jammed in too
"different voices were saying in the crowd, as the men looked at one another, and
 all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.  Looking down at the waters of the 
Enns under the bridge, Nesvitski suddenly heard a sound new to him, of something 
swiftly approaching... something big, that splashed into the water.  "Just see wh
ere it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, looking round at the sound.  
"Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.  The crowd moved on
 again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball.  "Hey, Cossack, my horse!" 
he said. "Now, then, you there! get out of the way! Make way!"  With great diffic
ulty he managed to get to his horse, and shouting continually he moved on. The so
ldiers squeezed themselves to make way for him, but again pressed on him so that 
they jammed his leg, and those nearest him were not to blame for they were themse
lves pressed still harder from behind.  "Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" cam
e a hoarse voice from behind him.  Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen p
aces away but separated by the living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red
 and shaggy, with his cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jaunt
ily over his shoulder.  "Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shoute
d Denisov evidently in a fit of rage, his coalblack eyes with their bloodshot whi
tes glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a small bare hand as
 red as his face.  "Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"
  "The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his white teeth fierc
ely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which twitched its ears as the bayo
nets touched it, and snorted, spurting white foam from his bit, tramping the plan
ks of the bridge with his hoofs, and apparently ready to jump over the railings h
ad his rider let him. "What is this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of 
the way!... Let us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I'll hack you wi
th my saber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its scabbard and flouri
shing it.  The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, and Den
isov joined Nesvitski.  "How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when th
e other had ridden up to him.  "They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered
 Vaska Denisov. "They keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they mean
 to fight, let's fight. But the devil knows what this is."  "What a dandy you are
 today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov's new cloak and saddlecloth.  Denisov
 smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffused a smell of perfu
me, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.  "Of course. I'm going into action! I've shav
ed, bwushed my teeth, and scented myself."  The imposing figure of Nesvitski foll
owed by his Cossack, and the determination of Denisov who flourished his sword an
d shouted frantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through to
 the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside the bridge Nesvi
tski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order, and having done this 
he rode back.  Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge. C
arelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing the ground, eager 
to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron draw nearer. Then the clang of hoo
fs, as of several horses galloping, resounded on the planks of the bridge, and th
e squadron, officers in front and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and 
began to emerge on his side of it.  The infantry who had been stopped crowded nea
r the bridge in the trampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of illwil
l, estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usually encount
er one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them in regular order. 
 "Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.  "What good are they? They're led a
bout just for show!" remarked another.  "Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" j
ested an hussar whose prancing horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.  "
I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fine cords would s
oon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping the mud off his face with his 
sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more like a bird than a man."  "There now, Ziki
n, they ought to put you on a horse. You'd look fine," said a corporal, chaffing 
a thin little soldier who bent under the weight of his knapsack.  "Take a stick b
etween your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!" the hussar shouted back.      CH
APTER VIII   The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezing tog
ether as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At last the baggage w
agons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the last battalion came onto the b
ridge. Only Denisov's squadron of hussars remained on the farther side of the bri
dge facing the enemy, who could be seen from the hill on the opposite bank but wa
s not yet visible from the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley throug
h which the river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away. A
t the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of our Cossack scout
s were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the high ground, artillery and 
troops in blue uniform were seen. These were the French. A group of Cossack scout
s retired down the hill at a trot. All the officers and men of Denisov's squadron
, though they tried to talk of other things and to look in other directions, thou
ght only of what was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the pat
ches appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy's troops. The weat
her had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightly upon the Dan
ube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and at intervals the bugle calls a
nd the shouts of the enemy could be heard from the hill. There was no one now bet
ween the squadron and the enemy except a few scattered skirmishers. An empty spac
e of some seven hundred yards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firin
g, and that stern, threatening, inaccessible, and intangible line which separates
 two hostile armies was all the more clearly felt.  "One step beyond that boundar
y line which resembles the line dividing the living from the dead lies uncertaint
y, suffering, and death. And what is there? Who is there?there beyond that field,
 that tree, that roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know. You
 fear and yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it must be c
rossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you will inevitably h
ave to learn what lies the other side of death. But you are strong, healthy, chee
rful, and excited, and are surrounded by other such excitedly animated and health
y men." So thinks, or at any rate feels, anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, 
and that feeling gives a particular glamour and glad keenness of impression to ev
erything that takes place at such moments.  On the high ground where the enemy wa
s, the smoke of a cannon rose, and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hu
ssar squadron. The officers who had been standing together rode off to their plac
es. The hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the whole 
squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadron commander, a
waiting the word of command. A second and a third cannon ball flew past. Evidentl
y they were firing at the hussars, but the balls with rapid rhythmic whistle flew
 over the heads of the horsemen and fell somewhere beyond them. The hussars did n
ot look round, but at the sound of each shot, as at the word of command, the whol
e squadron with its rows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its breath w
hile the ball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The soldiers w
ithout turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see their comrades'
 impression. Every face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler, showed one common 
expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement, around chin and mouth. The qu
artermaster frowned, looking at the soldiers as if threatening to punish them. Ca
det Mironov ducked every time a ball flew past. Rostov on the left flank, mounted
 on his Rooka handsome horse despite its game leghad the happy air of a schoolboy
 called up before a large audience for an examination in which he feels sure he w
ill distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone with a clear, bright express
ion, as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat under fire. But despite himsel
f, on his face too that same indication of something new and stern showed round t
he mouth.  "Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight! Look at
 me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turning his horse
 in front of the squadron.  The black, hairy, snubnosed face of Vaska Denisov, an
d his whole short sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in 
which he held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did, especia
lly toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle he was only redder than 
usual. With his shaggy head thrown back like birds when they drink, pressing his 
spurs mercilessly into the sides of his good horse, Bedouin, and sitting as thoug
h falling backwards in the saddle, he galloped to the other flank of the squadron
 and shouted in a hoarse voice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to
 Kirsten. The staff captain on his broadbacked, steady mare came at a walk to mee
t him. His face with its long mustache was serious as always, only his eyes were 
brighter than usual.  "Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come t
o a fight. You'll seewe shall retire."  "The devil only knows what they're about!
" muttered Denisov. "Ah, Wostov," he cried noticing the cadet's bright face, "you
've got it at last."  And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet
. Rostov felt perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge. De
nisov galloped up to him.  "Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them 
off."  "Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up his face 
as if driving off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stopping here? Don't you se
e the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadron back."  The squadron crossed 
the bridge and drew out of range of fire without having lost a single man. The se
cond squadron that had been in the front line followed them across and the last C
ossacks quitted the farther side of the river.  The two Pavlograd squadrons, havi
ng crossed the bridge, retired up the hill one after the other. Their colonel, Ka
rl Bogdanich Schubert, came up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not f
ar from Rostov, without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting f
or the first time since their encounter concerning Telyanin. Rostov, feeling that
 he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he now admitted that h
e had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from the colonel's athletic back, his 
nape covered with light hair, and his red neck. It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanic
h was only pretending not to notice him, and that his whole aim now was to test t
he cadet's courage, so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily then it s
eemed to him that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage. Next h
e thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack just to pu
nish himRostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack, Bogdanich would come up t
o him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously extend the hand of reconciliation
.  The highshouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as he had but
 recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. After his dismissal from h
eadquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment, saying he was not such a fo
ol as to slave at the front when he could get more rewards by doing nothing on th
e staff, and had succeeded in attaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince B
agration. He now came to his former chief with an order from the commander of the
 rear guard.  "Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air of gloomy
 gravity and glancing round at his comrades, "there is an order to stop and fire 
the bridge."  "An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.  "I don't myself kno
w 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone, "but the prince told me to 'go
 and tell the colonel that the hussars must return quickly and fire the bridge.'"
  Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to the colonel of h
ussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvitski came galloping up on a 
Cossack horse that could scarcely carry his weight.  "How's this, Colonel?" he sh
outed as he approached. "I told you to fire the bridge, and now someone has gone 
and blundered they are all beside themselves over there and one can't make anythi
ng out."  The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitski. 
 "You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you said nothing about 
firing it."  "But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his cap
 and smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't I tell
ing you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material had been put in position?" 
 "I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to burn th
e bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictly to obey. You sai
d the bridge would be burned, but who would it burn, I could not know by the holy
 spirit!"  "Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand. "
How did you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov.  "On the same business. But y
ou are damp! Let me wring you out!"  "You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." cont
inued the colonel in an offended tone.  "Colonel," interrupted the officer of the
 suite, "You must be quick or the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot."
  The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stout staff off
icer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.  "I will the bridge fire," he said in a sol
emn tone as if to announce that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endu
re he would still do the right thing.  Striking his horse with his long muscular 
legs as if it were to blame for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered
 the second squadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return t
o the bridge.  "There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "He wishe
s to test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. "Let him se
e whether I am a coward!" he thought.  Again on all the bright faces of the squad
ron the serious expression appeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostov wa
tched his enemy, the colonel, closelyto find in his face confirmation of his own 
conjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov, and looked as he alway
s did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word of command.  "Look 
sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.  Their sabers catching in
 the bridles and their spurs jingling, the hussars hastily dismounted, not knowin
g what they were to do. The men were crossing themselves. Rostov no longer looked
 at the colonel, he had no time. He was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so 
much afraid that his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse in
to an orderly's charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a thud. Deni
sov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something. Rostov saw nothing but th
e hussars running all around him, their spurs catching and their sabers clatterin
g.  "Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.  Rostov did not think what this cal
l for stretchers meant he ran on, trying only to be ahead of the others but just 
at the bridge, not looking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, st
umbled, and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.  "At boss zides, Capta
in," he heard the voice of the colonel, who, having ridden ahead, had pulled up h
is horse near the bridge, with a triumphant, cheerful face.  Rostov wiping his mu
ddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and was about to run on, thinking t
hat the farther he went to the front the better. But Bogdanich, without looking a
t or recognizing Rostov, shouted to him  "Who's that running on the middle of the
 bridge? To the right! Come back, Cadet!" he cried angrily and turning to Denisov
, who, showing off his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge  "Why r
un risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.  "Oh, every bullet has its bill
et," answered Vaska Denisov, turning in his saddle.   Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherko
v, and the officer of the suite were standing together out of range of the shots,
 watching, now the small group of men with yellow shakos, darkgreen jackets braid
ed with cord, and blue riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and th
en at what was approaching in the distance from the opposite sidethe blue uniform
s and groups with horses, easily recognizable as artillery.  "Will they burn the 
bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they get there and fire the bridge or
 will the French get within grapeshot range and wipe them out?" These were the qu
estions each man of the troops on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily 
asked himself with a sinking heartwatching the bridge and the hussars in the brig
ht evening light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with their bay
onets and guns.  "Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski "they are wit
hin grapeshot range now."  "He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the office
r of the suite.  "True enough," answered Nesvitski "two smart fellows could have 
done the job just as well."  "Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixe
d on the hussars, but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know w
hether he was speaking in jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency! How you look 
at things! Send two men? And who then would give us the Vladimir medal and ribbon
? But now, even if they do get peppered, the squadron may be recommended for hono
rs and he may get a ribbon. Our Bogdanich knows how things are done."  "There now
!" said the officer of the suite, "that's grapeshot."  He pointed to the French g
uns, the limbers of which were being detached and hurriedly removed.  On the Fren
ch side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smoke appeared, then a second an
d a third almost simultaneously, and at the moment when the first report was hear
d a fourth was seen. Then two reports one after another, and a third.  "Oh! Oh!" 
groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizing the officer of the suite by the a
rm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!"  "Two, I think."  "If I were Tsar I
 would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning away.  The French guns were hast
ily reloaded. The infantry in their blue uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a
 run. Smoke appeared again but at irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and 
rattled onto the bridge. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happening
 there, as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded in set
ting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, no longer to hi
nder them but because the guns were trained and there was someone to fire at.  Th
e French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars got back t
o their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went too high, but the last rou
nd fell in the midst of a group of hussars and knocked three of them over.  Rosto
v, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused on the bridge not knowing
 what to do. There was no one to hew down as he had always imagined battles to hi
mself, nor could he help to fire the bridge because he had not brought any burnin
g straw with him like the other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when sudden
ly he heard a rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar ne
arest to him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostov ran up to him with the o
thers. Again someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four men seized the hussar and began 
lifting him.  "Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but 
still he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.  Nicholas Rostov turned away and, 
as if searching for something, gazed into the distance, at the waters of the Danu
be, at the sky, and at the sun. How beautiful the sky looked how blue, how calm, 
and how deep! How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter
 the waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the faraway blue m
ountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, and the pine fores
ts veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peace and happiness... "I sho
uld wish for nothing else, nothing, if only I were there," thought Rostov. "In my
self alone and in that sunshine there is so much happiness but here... groans, su
ffering, fear, and this uncertainty and hurry... Therethey are shouting again, an
d again are all running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death,
 is here above me and around... Another instant and I shall never again see the s
un, this water, that gorge!..."  At that instant the sun began to hide behind the
 clouds, and other stretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death
 and of the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged into one feel
ing of sickening agitation.  "O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forg
ive, and protect me!" Rostov whispered.  The hussars ran back to the men who held
 their horses their voices sounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared 
from sight.  "Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just a
bove his ear.  "It's all over but I am a cowardyes, a coward!" thought Rostov, an
d sighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting one foot, from the 
orderly and began to mount.  "Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov.  "Yes and no
 mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like wegular bwicks and it's nasty work! An
 attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at the dogs! But this sort of thing is the 
very devil, with them shooting at you like a target."  And Denisov rode up to a g
roup that had stopped near Rostov, composed of the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, a
nd the officer from the suite.  "Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought
 Rostov. And this was true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the se
nsation which the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.  "Here's s
omething for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I don't get promoted to a subl
ieutenancy."  "Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the colonel trium
phantly and gaily.  "And if he asks about the losses?"  "A trifle," said the colo
nel in his bass voice "two hussars wounded, and one knocked out," he added, unabl
e to restrain a happy smile, and pronouncing the phrase "knocked out" with ringin
g distinctness.      CHAPTER IX   Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousan
d men under the command of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriend
ly to it, losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies, 
and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had been forese
en, the Russian army of thirtyfive thousand men commanded by Kutuzov was hurriedl
y retreating along the Danube, stopping where overtaken by the enemy and fighting
 rearguard actions only as far as necessary to enable it to retreat without losin
g its heavy equipment. There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk but
 despite the courage and enduranceacknowledged even by the enemywith which the Ru
ssians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet more rapid retreat
. Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and had joined Kutuzov at Braun
au now separated from the Russian army, and Kutuzov was left with only his own we
ak and exhausted forces. The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of. In
stead of an offensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with the m
odern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in Vienna by 
the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainable aim remaining for hi
m was to effect a junction with the forces that were advancing from Russia, witho
ut losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.  On the twentyeighth of October Kutuz
ov with his army crossed to the left bank of the Danube and took up a position fo
r the first time with the river between himself and the main body of the French. 
On the thirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the left bank, and 
broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken banners, canno
n, and two enemy generals. For the first time, after a fortnight's retreat, the R
ussian troops had halted and after a fight had not only held the field but had re
pulsed the French. Though the troops were illclad, exhausted, and had lost a thir
d of their number in killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers though a number of sic
k and wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letter in
 which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy and though the big hos
pitals and the houses in Krems converted into military hospitals could no longer 
accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet the stand made at Krems and the victory
 over Mortier raised the spirits of the army considerably. Throughout the whole a
rmy and at headquarters most joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imag
inary approach of columns from Russia, of some victory gained by the Austrians, a
nd of the retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.  Prince Andrew during the battle h
ad been in attendance on the Austrian General Schmidt, who was killed in the acti
on. His horse had been wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bul
let. As a mark of the commander in chief's special favor he was sent with the new
s of this victory to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna which was threat
ened by the French but at Brunn. Despite his apparently delicate build Prince And
rew could endure physical fatigue far better than many very muscular men, and on 
the night of the battle, having arrived at Krems excited but not weary, with disp
atches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov, he was sent immediately with a special dispatch
 to Brunn. To be so sent meant not only a reward but an important step toward pro
motion.  The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow that ha
d fallen the previous daythe day of the battle. Reviewing his impressions of the 
recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself the impression his news of a victo
ry would create, or recalling the sendoff given him by the commander in chief and
 his fellow officers, Prince Andrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying
 the feelings of a man who has at length begun to attain a longdesired happiness.
 As soon as he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of the whee
ls and the sensation of victory. Then he began to imagine that the Russians were 
running away and that he himself was killed, but he quickly roused himself with a
 feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that this was not so but that on the contr
ary the French had run away. He again recalled all the details of the victory and
 his own calm courage during the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... T
he dark starry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was thaw
ing in the sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides of the road w
ere forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.  At one of the post station
s he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded. The Russian officer in charge of the t
ransport lolled back in the front cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coar
se abuse. In each of the long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men 
were being jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking he heard Russian
 words, others were eating bread the more severely wounded looked silently, with 
the languid interest of sick children, at the envoy hurrying past them.  Prince A
ndrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what action they had been w
ounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube," answered the soldier. Prince Andre
w took out his purse and gave the soldier three gold pieces.  "That's for them al
l," he said to the officer who came up.  "Get well soon, lads!" he continued, tur
ning to the soldiers. "There's plenty to do still."  "What news, sir?" asked the 
officer, evidently anxious to start a conversation.  "Good news!... Go on!" he sh
outed to the driver, and they galloped on.  It was already quite dark when Prince
 Andrew rattled over the paved streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by h
igh buildings, the lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and
 all that atmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to 
a soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night, Prince 
Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and alert than he h
ad done the day before. Only his eyes gleamed feverishly and his thoughts followe
d one another with extraordinary clearness and rapidity. He again vividly recalle
d the details of the battle, no longer dim, but definite and in the concise form 
in which he imagined himself stating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imag
ined the casual questions that might be put to him and the answers he would give.
 He expected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance to the
 palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, and learning that he 
was a special messenger led him to another entrance.  "To the right from the corr
idor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will find the adjutant on duty," said the offic
ial. "He will conduct you to the Minister of War."  The adjutant on duty, meeting
 Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went in to the Minister of War. Five minut
es later he returned and bowing with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew be
fore him along a corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. T
he adjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off any attempt at
 familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.  Prince Andrew's joyous feelin
g was considerably weakened as he approached the door of the minister's room. He 
felt offended, and without his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately tur
ned into one of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantly 
suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise the adjutant a
nd the minister. "Away from the smell of powder, they probably think it easy to g
ain victories!" he thought. His eyes narrowed disdainfully, he entered the room o
f the Minister of War with peculiarly deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain w
as heightened when he saw the minister seated at a large table reading some paper
s and making pencil notes on them, and for the first two or three minutes taking 
no notice of his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the minister's bent 
bald head with its gray temples. He went on reading to the end, without raising h
is eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps.  "Take this and de
liver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him the papers and still taking no no
tice of the special messenger.  Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kut
uzov's army interested the Minister of War less than any of the other matters he 
was concerned with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger that impre
ssion. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me," he thought. The mini
ster drew the remaining papers together, arranged them evenly, and then raised hi
s head. He had an intellectual and distinctive head, but the instant he turned to
 Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent expression on his face changed in a way evid
ently deliberate and habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smil
e which does not even attempt to hide its artificiality of a man who is continual
ly receiving many petitioners one after another.  "From General Field Marshal Kut
uzov?" he asked. "I hope it is good news? There has been an encounter with Mortie
r? A victory? It was high time!"  He took the dispatch which was addressed to him
 and began to read it with a mournful expression.  "Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!"
 he exclaimed in German. "What a calamity! What a calamity!"  Having glanced thro
ugh the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked at Prince Andrew, evidently c
onsidering something.  "Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But 
Mortier is not captured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have brought goo
d news, though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory. His Majes
ty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I thank you! You must have a res
t. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade. However, I will let you know."  The
 stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking, reappeared.  "Au re
voir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to see you," he added
, bowing his head.  When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the inter
est and happiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in the indiffere
nt hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. The whole tenor of his t
houghts instantaneously changed the battle seemed the memory of a remote event lo
ng past.      CHAPTER X   Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian a
cquaintance of his in the diplomatic service.  "Ah, my dear prince! I could not h
ave a more welcome visitor," said Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "
Franz, put the prince's things in my bedroom," said he to the servant who was ush
ering Bolkonski in. "So you're a messenger of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sit
ting here ill, as you see."  After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into 
the diplomat's luxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilib
in settled down comfortably beside the fire.  After his journey and the campaign 
during which he had been deprived of all the comforts of cleanliness and all the 
refinements of life, Prince Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxuriou
s surroundings such as he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was p
leasant, after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian for the
y were speaking French at least with a Russian who would, he supposed, share the 
general Russian antipathy to the Austrians which was then particularly strong.  B
ilibin was a man of thirtyfive, a bachelor, and of the same circle as Prince Andr
ew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but had become more intim
ate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov. Just as Prince Andrew was a yo
ung man who gave promise of rising high in the military profession, so to an even
 greater extent Bilibin gave promise of rising in his diplomatic career. He still
 a young man but no longer a young diplomat, as he had entered the service at the
 age of sixteen, had been in Paris and Copenhagen, and now held a rather importan
t post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassador in Vienna knew him
 and valued him. He was not one of those many diplomats who are esteemed because 
they have certain negative qualities, avoid doing certain things, and speak Frenc
h. He was one of those, who, liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indo
lence would sometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. He worked well wh
atever the import of his work. It was not the question "What for?" but the questi
on "How?" that interested him. What the diplomatic matter might be he did not car
e, but it gave him great pleasure to prepare a circular, memorandum, or report, s
killfully, pointedly, and elegantly. Bilibin's services were valued not only for 
what he wrote, but also for his skill in dealing and conversing with those in the
 highest spheres.  Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it coul
d be made elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to say som
ething striking and took part in a conversation only when that was possible. His 
conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original, finished phrases of gene
ral interest. These sayings were prepared in the inner laboratory of his mind in 
a portable form as if intentionally, so that insignificant society people might c
arry them from drawing room to drawing room. And, in fact, Bilibin's witticisms w
ere hawked about in the Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on matt
ers considered important.  His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrin
kles, which always looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingers a
fter a Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal play of 
expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep folds and his eye
brows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and deep wrinkles would crease
 his cheeks. His small, deepset eyes always twinkled and looked out straight.  "W
ell, now tell me about your exploits," said he.  Bolkonski, very modestly without
 once mentioning himself, described the engagement and his reception by the Minis
ter of War.  "They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game of ski
ttles," said he in conclusion.  Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disap
peared.  "Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a distance 
and puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la haute estime que je profess
e pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire n'est pas des plus v
ictorieuses." *        * "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodo
x      Russian army, I must say that your victory was not      particularly victo
rious."   He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those words in 
Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.  "Come now! You with a
ll your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier and his one division, and even the
n Mortier slips through your fingers! Where's the victory?"  "But seriously," sai
d Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say without boasting that it was a little be
tter than at Ulm..."  "Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"  "B
ecause not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness of a parade. 
We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by seven in the morning but 
had not reached it by five in the afternoon."  "And why didn't you do it at seven
 in the morning? You ought to have been there at seven in the morning," returned 
Bilibin with a smile. "You ought to have been there at seven in the morning."  "W
hy did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomatic methods that he h
ad better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew in the same tone.  "I know,"
 interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy to take marshals, sitting o
n a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still why didn't you capture him? So don'
t be surprised if not only the Minister of War but also his Most August Majesty t
he Emperor and King Francis is not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor
 secretary of the Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token of my joy to giv
e my Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the Prater... True, we ha
ve no Prater here..."  He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkle
d his forehead.  "It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. 
"I confess I do not understand perhaps there are diplomatic subtleties here beyon
d my feeble intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mack loses a whole army, the A
rchduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signs of life and make blunder af
ter blunder. Kutuzov alone at last gains a real victory, destroying the spell of 
the invincibility of the French, and the Minister of War does not even care to he
ar the details."  "That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Ts
ar, for Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but what do 
we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring us nice news of a v
ictory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand one archduke's as good as another, as yo
u know and even if it is only over a fire brigade of Bonaparte's, that will be an
other story and we'll fire off some cannon! But this sort of thing seems done on 
purpose to vex us. The Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke Ferdinand disgrac
es himself. You abandon Vienna, give up its defenseas much as to say 'Heaven is w
ith us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one general whom we all loved,
 Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate us on the victory! Ad
mit that more irritating news than yours could not have been conceived. It's as i
f it had been done on purpose, on purpose. Besides, suppose you did gain a brilli
ant victory, if even the Archduke Karl gained a victory, what effect would that h
ave on the general course of events? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by
 the French army!"  "What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"  "Not only occupied, but B
onaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, our dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for o
rders."  After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, and es
pecially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take in the full si
gnificance of the words he heard.  "Count Lichtenfels was here this morning," Bil
ibin continued, "and showed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vien
na was fully described Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that your v
ictory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can't be received as a sa
vior."  "Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Prince Andrew
, beginning to understand that his news of the battle before Krems was really of 
small importance in view of such events as the fall of Austria's capital. "How is
 it Vienna was taken? What of the bridge and its celebrated bridgehead and Prince
 Auersperg? We heard reports that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said
.  "Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is defending usdoi
ng it very badly, I think, but still he is defending us. But Vienna is on the oth
er side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and I hope it will not be, for it 
is mined and orders have been given to blow it up. Otherwise we should long ago h
ave been in the mountains of Bohemia, and you and your army would have spent a ba
d quarter of an hour between two fires."  "But still this does not mean that the 
campaign is over," said Prince Andrew.  "Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here th
ink so too, but they daren't say so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the
 campaign, it won't be your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that
 will decide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibin quoting one of h
is own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead, and pausing. "The only quest
ion is what will come of the meeting between the Emperor Alexander and the King o
f Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia joins the Allies, Austria's hand will be forced a
nd there will be war. If not it is merely a question of settling where the prelim
inaries of the new Campo Formio are to be drawn up."  "What an extraordinary geni
us!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed, clenching his small hand and striking the 
table with it, "and what luck the man has!"  "Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquiring
ly, puckering up his forehead to indicate that he was about to say something witt
y. "Buonaparte?" he repeated, accentuating the u "I think, however, now that he l
ays down laws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u! * I shal
l certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"       * "We must 
let him off the u!"   "But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really thin
k the campaign is over?"  "This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of,
 and she is not used to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the fi
rst place because her provinces have been pillagedthey say the Holy Russian army 
loots terriblyher army is destroyed, her capital taken, and all this for the beau
x yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. And thereforethis is between ourselvesI instin
ctively feel that we are being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations wit
h France and projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."       * Fi
ne eyes.   "Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."  "If we l
ive we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becoming smooth as a sign that
 the conversation was at an end.  When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared fo
r him and lay down in a clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragra
nt pillows, he felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far 
away from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery, Bonaparte's new tr
iumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with the Emperor Francis occ
upied his thoughts.  He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, 
of musketry and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now 
again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill, the Frenc
h were firing, and he felt his heart palpitating as he rode forward beside Schmid
t with the bullets merrily whistling all around, and he experienced tenfold the j
oy of living, as he had not done since childhood.  He woke up...  "Yes, that all 
happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself like a child, he fell into a 
deep, youthful slumber.      CHAPTER XI   Next day he woke late. Recalling his re
cent impressions, the first thought that came into his mind was that today he had
 to be presented to the Emperor Francis he remembered the Minister of War, the po
lite Austrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last night's conversation. Having dressed fo
r his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he had not worn for a lon
g time, he went into Bilibin's study fresh, animated, and handsome, with his hand
 bandaged. In the study were four gentlemen of the diplomatic corps. With Prince 
Hippolyte Kuragin, who was a secretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already acqu
ainted. Bilibin introduced him to the others.  The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin
's were young, wealthy, gay society men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special
 set which Bilibin, their leader, called les notres. * This set, consisting almos
t exclusively of diplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothing to 
do with war or politics but related to high society, to certain women, and to the
 official side of the service. These gentlemen received Prince Andrew as one of t
hemselves, an honor they did not extend to many. From politeness and to start con
versation, they asked him a few questions about the army and the battle, and then
 the talk went off into merry jests and gossip.       * Ours.   "But the best of 
it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of a fellow diplomat, "that the Chan
cellor told him flatly that his appointment to London was a promotion and that he
 was so to regard it. Can you fancy the figure he cut?..."  "But the worst of it,
 gentlemenI am giving Kuragin away to youis that that man suffers, and this Don J
uan, wicked fellow, is taking advantage of it!"  Prince Hippolyte was lolling in 
a lounge chair with his legs over its arm. He began to laugh.  "Tell me about tha
t!" he said.  "Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.  "You, Bolko
nski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew, "that all the atrocitie
s of the French army I nearly said of the Russian army are nothing compared to wh
at this man has been doing among the women!"  "La femme est la compagne de l'homm
e," * announced Prince Hippolyte, and began looking through a lorgnette at his el
evated legs.       * "Woman is man's companion."   Bilibin and the rest of "ours"
 burst out laughing in Hippolyte's face, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of
 whomhe had to admithe had almost been jealous on his wife's account, was the but
t of this set.  "Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski. "K
uragin is exquisite when he discusses politicsyou should see his gravity!"  He sa
t down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking to him about pol
itics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these two.  "The Berlin cabine
t cannot express a feeling of alliance," began Hippolyte gazing round with import
ance at the others, "without expressing... as in its last note... you understand.
.. Besides, unless His Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our al
liance...  "Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizing him b
y the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger than nonintervention. An
d..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute the nonreceipt of our dispatch of Nov
ember 18. That is how it will end." And he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate t
hat he had now quite finished.  "Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secr
etest in thy golden mouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved w
ith satisfaction.  Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was ev
idently distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wild laugh
ter that convulsed his usually impassive features.  "Well now, gentlemen," said B
ilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest in this house and in Brunn itself. I want to enter
tain him as far as I can, with all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vien
na it would be easy, but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is more difficu
lt, and I beg you all to help me. Brunn's attractions must be shown him. You can 
undertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course the women."  "We 
must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours," kissing his finger
 tips.  "In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humane interes
ts," said Bilibin.  "I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality
, gentlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrew looking at h
is watch.  "Where to?"  "To the Emperor."  "Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonsk
i! Au revoir, Prince! Come back early to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll ta
ke you in hand."  "When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise 
the way that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin, acc
ompanying him to the hall.  "I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I
 know the facts, I can't," replied Bolkonski, smiling.  "Well, talk as much as yo
u can, anyway. He has a passion for giving audiences, but he does not like talkin
g himself and can't do it, as you will see."      CHAPTER XII   At the levee Prin
ce Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had been told to, and the Emper
or Francis merely looked fixedly into his face and just nodded to him with his lo
ng head. But after it was over, the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremon
iously informed Bolkonski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience. The E
mperor Francis received him standing in the middle of the room. Before the conver
sation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor seemed confuse
d and blushed as if not knowing what to say.  "Tell me, when did the battle begin
?" he asked hurriedly.  Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just
 as simple "Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spo
ke as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questionsthe answers to these
 questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him.  "At what o'clock did 
the battle begin?" asked the Emperor.  "I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'cl
ock the battle began at the front, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack be
gan after five in the afternoon," replied Bolkonski growing more animated and exp
ecting that he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which he had ready
 in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor smiled and interrupted
 him.  "How many miles?"  "From where to where, Your Majesty?"  "From Durrenstein
 to Krems."  "Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."  "The French have abandoned 
the left bank?"  "According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts durin
g the night."  "Is there sufficient forage in Krems?"  "Forage has not been suppl
ied to the extent..."  The Emperor interrupted him.  "At what o'clock was General
 Schmidt killed?"  "At seven o'clock, I believe."  "At seven o'clock? It's very s
ad, very sad!"  The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdr
ew and was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he saw fr
iendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday's adjutant reproached him for no
t having stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house. The Minister of War
 came up and congratulated him on the Maria Theresa Order of the third grade, whi
ch the Emperor was conferring on him. The Empress' chamberlain invited him to see
 Her Majesty. The archduchess also wished to see him. He did not know whom to ans
wer, and for a few seconds collected his thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador to
ok him by the shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to him.  Contrar
y to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought was joyfully received. A thanksgi
ving service was arranged, Kutuzov was awarded the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, 
and the whole army received rewards. Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to
 spend the whole morning calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries. Between f
our and five in the afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to Bil
ibin's house thinking out a letter to his father about the battle and his visit t
o Brunn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of luggage. Franz, Bilibin's ma
n, was dragging a portmanteau with some difficulty out of the front door.  Before
 returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop to provide himself w
ith some books for the campaign, and had spent some time in the shop.  "What is i
t?" he asked.  "Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling the por
tmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. The scoundrel is aga
in at our heels!"  "Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.  Bilibin came out to meet him
. His usually calm face showed excitement.  "There now! Confess that this is deli
ghtful," said he. "This affair of the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have cros
sed without striking a blow!"  Prince Andrew could not understand.  "But where do
 you come from not to know what every coachman in the town knows?"  "I come from 
the archduchess'. I heard nothing there."  "And you didn't see that everybody is 
packing up?"  "I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatie
ntly.  "What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge that Auerspe
rg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up so Murat is now rushing along t
he road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two."  "What? Here? But why did the
y not blow up the bridge, if it was mined?"  "That is what I ask you. No one, not
 even Bonaparte, knows why."  Bolkonski shrugged his shoulders.  "But if the brid
ge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? It will be cut off," said he.  
"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered Vienna as I told 
you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, those gentlemen, messieurs les mar
echaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard, mount and ride to the bridge. Observe that
 all three are Gascons. 'Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bridg
e is mined and doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its hea
d and an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up the bridge and 
not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the Emperor Napoleon if we tak
e this bridge, so let us three go and take it!' 'Yes, let's!' say the others. And
 off they go and take the bridge, cross it, and now with their whole army are on 
this side of the Danube, marching on us, you, and your lines of communication."  
     * The marshalls.   "Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. T
his news grieved him and yet he was pleased.  As soon as he learned that the Russ
ian army was in such a hopeless situation it occurred to him that it was he who w
as destined to lead it out of this position that here was the Toulon that would l
ift him from the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame! 
Listening to Bilibin he was already imagining how on reaching the army he would g
ive an opinion at the war council which would be the only one that could save the
 army, and how he alone would be entrusted with the executing of the plan.  "Stop
 this jesting," he said  "I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer o
r sadder. These gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs
 they assure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on their way to neg
otiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the tetedepont. * They spin him 
a thousand gasconades, saying that the war is over, that the Emperor Francis is a
rranging a meeting with Bonaparte, that they desire to see Prince Auersperg, and 
so on. The officer sends for Auersperg these gentlemen embrace the officers, crac
k jokes, sit on the cannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets to the bridge u
nobserved, flings the bags of incendiary material into the water, and approaches 
the tetedepont. At length appears the lieutenant general, our dear Prince Auerspe
rg von Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the Austrian army, hero of the Tu
rkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can shake one another's hand.... The Emperor
 Napoleon burns with impatience to make Prince Auersperg's acquaintance.' In a wo
rd, those gentlemen, Gascons indeed, so bewildered him with fine words, and he is
 so flattered by his rapidly established intimacy with the French marshals, and s
o dazzled by the sight of Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes, qu'il n'y voit que d
u feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire sur l'ennemi!" *2 In spite of the
 animation of his speech, Bilibin did not forget to pause after this mot to give 
time for its due appreciation. "The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, sp
ikes the guns, and the bridge is taken! But what is best of all," he went on, his
 excitement subsiding under the delightful interest of his own story, "is that th
e sergeant in charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to fire the mines
 and blow up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the French troops were runnin
g onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannes stayed his hand. The sergeant, w
ho was evidently wiser than his general, goes up to Auersperg and says 'Prince, y
ou are being deceived, here are the French!' Murat, seeing that all is lost if th
e sergeant is allowed to speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment he i
s a true Gascon and says 'I don't recognize the worldfamous Austrian discipline, 
if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It was a stroke of genius. 
Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and orders the sergeant to be arreste
d. Come, you must own that this affair of the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is 
not exactly stupidity, nor rascality...."        * Bridgehead.       * 2 That the
ir fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that      he ought to be firing at the 
enemy.   "It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the gray ov
ercoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing, and the glory that
 awaited him.  "Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," replied
 Bilibin. "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity it is just as at Ulm...
 it is..."he seemed to be trying to find the right expression. "C'est... c'est du
 Mack. Nous sommes mackes It is... it is a bit of Mack. We are Macked," he conclu
ded, feeling that he had produced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repea
ted. His hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with a s
light smile he began to examine his nails.  "Where are you off to?" he said sudde
nly to Prince Andrew who had risen and was going toward his room.  "I am going aw
ay."  "Where to?"  "To the army."  "But you meant to stay another two days?"  "Bu
t now I am off at once."  And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his dep
arture went to his room.  "Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I
 have been thinking about you. Why are you going?"  And in proof of the conclusiv
eness of his opinion all the wrinkles vanished from his face.  Prince Andrew look
ed inquiringly at him and gave no reply.  "Why are you going? I know you think it
 your duty to gallop back to the army now that it is in danger. I understand that
. Mon cher, it is heroism!"  "Not at all," said Prince Andrew.  "But as you are a
 philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the other side of the question and you
 will see that your duty, on the contrary, is to take care of yourself. Leave it 
to those who are no longer fit for anything else.... You have not been ordered to
 return and have not been dismissed from here therefore, you can stay and go with
 us wherever our ill luck takes us. They say we are going to Olmutz, and Olmutz i
s a very decent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my caleche."  "Do stop
 joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.  "I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consid
er! Where and why are you going, when you might remain here? You are faced by one
 of two things," and the skin over his left temple puckered, "either you will not
 reach your regiment before peace is concluded, or you will share defeat and disg
race with Kutuzov's whole army."  And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that
 the dilemma was insoluble.  "I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew col
dly, but he thought "I am going to save the army."  "My dear fellow, you are a he
ro!" said Bilibin.      CHAPTER XIII   That same night, having taken leave of the
 Minister of War, Bolkonski set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he woul
d find it and fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.  In Brunn
 everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavy baggage was alread
y being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf Prince Andrew struck the high road
 along which the Russian army was moving with great haste and in the greatest dis
order. The road was so obstructed with carts that it was impossible to get by in 
a carriage. Prince Andrew took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, an
d hungry and weary, making his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of the
 commander in chief and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of the position
 of the army reached him as he went along, and the appearance of the troops in th
eir disorderly flight confirmed these rumors.  "Cette armee russe que l'or de l'A
ngleterre a transportee des extremites de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouv
er le meme sortle sort de l'armee d'Ulm." * He remembered these words in Bonapart
e's address to his army at the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in him a
stonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride, and a hope of 
glory. "And should there be nothing left but to die?" he thought. "Well, if need 
be, I shall do it no worse than others."        * "That Russian army which has be
en brought from the ends of      the earth by English gold, we shall cause to sha
re the same      fatethe fate of the army at Ulm."   He looked with disdain at th
e endless confused mass of detachments, carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage
 wagons and vehicles of all kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy r
oad, three and sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far 
as ear could reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts and gu
n carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, the urging of horse
s, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers. All along the sides of 
the road fallen horses were to be seen, some flayed, some not, and brokendown car
ts beside which solitary soldiers sat waiting for something, and again soldiers s
traggling from their companies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring village
s, or returned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At each a
scent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the din of shouting m
ore incessant. Soldiers floundering kneedeep in mud pushed the guns and wagons th
emselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped, traces broke, and lungs were strained wit
h shouting. The officers directing the march rode backward and forward between th
e carts. Their voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their 
faces that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder.  "Here is
 our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski, recalling Bilibin's words.  
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode up to a convoy. Dir
ectly opposite to him came a strange onehorse vehicle, evidently rigged up by sol
diers out of any available materials and looking like something between a cart, a
 cabriolet, and a caleche. A soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls
 sat behind the apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode u
p and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention was diverted 
by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. An officer in charge of tra
nsport was beating the soldier who was driving the woman's vehicle for trying to 
get ahead of others, and the strokes of his whip fell on the apron of the equipag
e. The woman screamed piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind
 the apron and, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried  "Mr. Aid
edecamp! Mr. Aidedecamp!... For heaven's sake... Protect me! What will become of 
us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh Chasseurs.... They won't let us pa
ss, we are left behind and have lost our people..."  "I'll flatten you into a pan
cake!" shouted the angry officer to the soldier. "Turn back with your slut!"  "Mr
. Aidedecamp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamed the doctor's wife.  "K
indly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said Prince Andrew riding 
up to the officer.  The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again
 to the soldier. "I'll teach you to push on!... Back!"  "Let them pass, I tell yo
u!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his lips.  "And who are you?" cried the o
fficer, turning on him with tipsy rage, "who are you? Are you in command here? Eh
? I am commander here, not you! Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repe
ated he. This expression evidently pleased him.  "That was a nice snub for the li
ttle aidedecamp," came a voice from behind.  Prince Andrew saw that the officer w
as in that state of senseless, tipsy rage when a man does not know what he is say
ing. He saw that his championship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might ex
pose him to what he dreaded more than anything in the worldto ridicule but his in
stinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence Prince Andrew, his 
face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised his riding whip.  "Kind...ly 
letthempass!"  The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.  "It's all t
he fault of these fellows on the staff that there's this disorder," he muttered. 
"Do as you like."  Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from 
the doctor's wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with a sense 
of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene he galloped on to the v
illage where he was told that the commander in chief was.  On reaching the villag
e he dismounted and went to the nearest house, intending to rest if but for a mom
ent, eat something, and try to sort out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that
 confused his mind. "This is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinkin
g as he went up to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called hi
m by name.  He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the little w
indow. Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, and flourishing h
is arm, called him to enter.  "Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come 
quick..." he shouted.  Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and anothe
r adjutant having something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if he
 had any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm. This was part
icularly noticeable on Nesvitski's usually laughing countenance.  "Where is the c
ommander in chief?" asked Bolkonski.  "Here, in that house," answered the adjutan
t.  "Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" asked Nesvitski.  "I was
 going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I could do to get here."
  "And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack, we're gettin
g it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and have something to eat."  "Yo
u won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now, Prince. And God
 only knows where your man Peter is," said the other adjutant.  "Where are headqu
arters?"  "We are to spend the night in Znaim."  "Well, I have got all I need int
o packs for two horses," said Nesvitski. "They've made up splendid packs for mefi
t to cross the Bohemian mountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what'
s the matter with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticing t
hat Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.  "It's nothing," replied Prince
 Andrew.  He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wife and 
the convoy officer.  "What is the commander in chief doing here?" he asked.  "I c
an't make out at all," said Nesvitski.  "Well, all I can make out is that everyth
ing is abominable, abominable, quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went
 off to the house where the commander in chief was.  Passing by Kutuzov's carriag
e and the exhausted saddle horses of his suite, with their Cossacks who were talk
ing loudly together, Prince Andrew entered the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was t
old, was in the house with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Aust
rian general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlovski was squat
ting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turned up, was hasti
ly writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlovski's face looked wornhe too had
 evidently not slept all night. He glanced at Prince Andrew and did not even nod 
to him.  "Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating to the cler
k. "The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian..."  "One can't write so fast, your honor," sai
d the clerk, glancing angrily and disrespectfully at Kozlovski.  Through the door
 came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited and dissatisfied, interrupted by ano
ther, an unfamiliar voice. From the sound of these voices, the inattentive way Ko
zlovski looked at him, the disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact 
that the clerk and Kozlovski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the 
commander in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the horse
s near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and disastrous was
 about to happen.  He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.  "Immediately, P
rince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Bagration."  "What about capitulation?"
  "Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."  Prince Andrew moved tow
ard the door from whence voices were heard. Just as he was going to open it the s
ounds ceased, the door opened, and Kutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face app
eared in the doorway. Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutuzov but the expre
ssion of the commander in chief's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied w
ith thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He looked straight
 at his adjutant's face without recognizing him.  "Well, have you finished?" said
 he to Kozlovski.  "One moment, your excellency."  Bagration, a gaunt middleaged 
man of medium height with a firm, impassive face of Oriental type, came out after
 the commander in chief.  "I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince A
ndrew rather loudly, handing Kutuzov an envelope.  "Ah, from Vienna? Very good. L
ater, later!"  Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.  "Well, goodby, Pr
ince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and may Christ be with you in your gre
at endeavor!"  His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his 
left hand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which he wore a ri
ng, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidently habitual, off
ering his puffy cheek, but Bagration kissed him on the neck instead.  "Christ be 
with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriage. "Get in with me," said 
he to Bolkonski.  "Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to 
remain with Prince Bagration's detachment."  "Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing
 that Bolkonski still delayed, he added "I need good officers myself, need them m
yself!"  They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.  "The
re is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man's penetration h
e understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's mind. "If a tenth part of his de
tachment returns I shall thank God," he added as if speaking to himself.  Prince 
Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him and involuntarily n
oticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near his temple, where an Ismail bu
llet had pierced his skull, and the empty eye socket. "Yes, he has a right to spe
ak so calmly of those men's death," thought Bolkonski.  "That is why I beg to be 
sent to that detachment," he said.  Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forg
otten what he had been saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, ge
ntly swaying on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew. The
re was not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony he questioned Pr
ince Andrew about the details of his interview with the Emperor, about the remark
s he had heard at court concerning the Krems affair, and about some ladies they b
oth knew.      CHAPTER XIV   On November 1 Kutuzov had received, through a spy, n
ews that the army he commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy report
ed that the French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in immens
e force upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that were arriving f
rom Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon's army of one hundred
 and fifty thousand men would cut him off completely and surround his exhausted a
rmy of forty thousand, and he would find himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. 
If Kutuzov decided to abandon the road connecting him with the troops arriving fr
om Russia, he would have to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian
 mountains, defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and abandoning
 all hope of a junction with Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat along the r
oad from Krems to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving from Russia, he riske
d being forestalled on that road by the French who had crossed the Vienna bridge,
 and encumbered by his baggage and transport, having to accept battle on the marc
h against an enemy three times as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.  K
utuzov chose this latter course.  The French, the spy reported, having crossed th
e Vienna bridge, were advancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixtysi
x miles off on the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before the Fren
ch, there would be great hope of saving the army to let the French forestall him 
at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to a disgrace such as that of Ulm, 
or to utter destruction. But to forestall the French with his whole army was impo
ssible. The road for the French from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than 
the road for the Russians from Krems to Znaim.  The night he received the news, K
utuzov sent Bagration's vanguard, four thousand strong, to the right across the h
ills from the KremsZnaim to the ViennaZnaim road. Bagration was to make this marc
h without resting, and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he su
cceeded in forestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible. Kutu
zov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim.  Marching thirty miles
 that stormy night across roadless hills, with his hungry, illshod soldiers, and 
losing a third of his men as stragglers by the way, Bagration came out on the Vie
nnaZnaim road at Hollabrunn a few hours ahead of the French who were approaching 
Hollabrunn from Vienna. Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some da
ys before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagration with his four thousand hungry, ex
hausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy army that came upon him
 at Hollabrunn, which was clearly impossible. But a freak of fate made the imposs
ible possible. The success of the trick that had placed the Vienna bridge in the 
hands of the French without a fight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a simi
lar way. Meeting Bagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to 
be Kutuzov's whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the arrival
 of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna, and with this objec
t offered a three days' truce on condition that both armies should remain in posi
tion without moving. Murat declared that negotiations for peace were already proc
eeding, and that he therefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. 
Count Nostitz, the Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed Murat'
s emissary and retired, leaving Bagration's division exposed. Another emissary ro
de to the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer the Russia
n army the three days' truce. Bagration replied that he was not authorized either
 to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant to Kutuzov to report the offer
 he had received.  A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of gaining time, giving Bagr
ation's exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and heavy convoys w
hose movements were concealed from the French advance if but one stage nearer Zna
im. The offer of a truce gave the only, and a quite unexpected, chance of saving 
the army. On receiving the news he immediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzi
ngerode, who was in attendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was not m
erely to agree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, and meanwhil
e Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost the movements of the ba
ggage trains of the entire army along the KremsZnaim road. Bagration's exhausted 
and hungry detachment, which alone covered this movement of the transport and of 
the whole army, had to remain stationary in face of an enemy eight times as stron
g as itself.  Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation which wer
e in no way binding might give time for part of the transport to pass, and also t
hat Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved correct. As soon as Bon
aparte who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles from Hollabrunn received Murat's disp
atch with the proposal of a truce and a capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrot
e the following letter to Murat   Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,  at eight o'cl
ock in the morning  To PRINCE MURAT,  I cannot find words to express to you my di
spleasure. You command only my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an arm
istice without my order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Bre
ak the armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that the general 
who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and that no one but the Emper
or of Russia has that right.  If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that co
nvention, I will ratify it but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russian 
army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery.  The Russian E
mperor's aidedecamp is an impostor. Officers are nothing when they have no powers
 this one had none.... The Austrians let themselves be tricked at the crossing of
 the Vienna bridge, you are letting yourself be tricked by an aidedecamp of the E
mperor.  NAPOLEON   Bonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing lett
er to Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with all the 
Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victim escape, and Bagra
tion's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires, dried and warmed themselves, 
cooked their porridge for the first time for three days, and not one of them knew
 or imagined what was in store for him.      CHAPTER XV   Between three and four 
o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who had persisted in his request to Kutuz
ov, arrived at Grunth and reported himself to Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had
 not yet reached Murat's detachment and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagratio
n's detachment no one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They talk
ed of peace but did not believe in its possibility others talked of a battle but 
also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement. Bagration, knowing Bolkonski t
o be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received him with distinction and special m
arks of favor, explaining to him that there would probably be an engagement that 
day or the next, and giving him full liberty to remain with him during the battle
 or to join the rearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also
 very important."  "However, there will hardly be an engagement today," said Bagr
ation as if to reassure Prince Andrew.  "If he is one of the ordinary little staf
f dandies sent to earn a medal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguar
d, but if he wishes to stay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's a br
ave officer," thought Bagration. Prince Andrew, without replying, asked the princ
e's permission to ride round the position to see the disposition of the forces, s
o as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute an order. The officer on d
uty, a handsome, elegantly dressed man with a diamond ring on his forefinger, who
 was fond of speaking French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince 
Andrew.  On all sides they saw rainsoaked officers with dejected faces who seemed
 to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches, and fencing from 
the village.  "There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff of
ficer pointing to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them in hand. And there,
" he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit. This morning I turned th
em all out and now look, it's full again. I must go there, Prince, and scare them
 a bit. It won't take a moment."  "Yes, let's go in and I will get myself a roll 
and some cheese," said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.  "
Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you something."  They dis
mounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed and weary faces, wer
e sitting at the table eating and drinking.  "Now what does this mean, gentlemen?
" said the staff officer, in the reproachful tone of a man who has repeated the s
ame thing more than once. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. Th
e prince gave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you, Captain," and he
 turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who without his boots he had gi
ven them to the canteen keeper to dry, in only his stockings, rose when they ente
red, smiling not altogether comfortably.  "Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, 
Captain Tushin?" he continued. "One would think that as an artillery officer you 
would set a good example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be 
sounded and you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" The staff officer
 smiled. "Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of you, all!" he added in a
 tone of command.  Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artille
ry officer Tushin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to t
he other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes from Princ
e Andrew to the staff officer.  "The soldiers say it feels easier without boots,"
 said Captain Tushin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishi
ng to adopt a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his jest was 
unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.  "Kindly return to your post
s," said the staff officer trying to preserve his gravity.  Prince Andrew glanced
 again at the artillery officer's small figure. There was something peculiar abou
t it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic, but extremely attractive.  The staff offic
er and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.  Having ridden beyond the 
village, continually meeting and overtaking soldiers and officers of various regi
ments, they saw on their left some entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug
 clay of which showed up red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt slee
ves despite the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants 
spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind the bank by un
seen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at the entrenchment, an
d went on again. Just behind it they came upon some dozens of soldiers, continual
ly replaced by others, who ran from the entrenchment. They had to hold their nose
s and put their horses to a trot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these 
latrines.  "Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince," * said the staff off
icer.       * "This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."   They rode up the o
pposite hill. From there the French could already be seen. Prince Andrew stopped 
and began examining the position.  "That's our battery," said the staff officer i
ndicating the highest point. "It's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without h
is boots. You can see everything from there let's go there, Prince."  "Thank you 
very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishing to rid himself of thi
s staff officer's company, "please don't trouble yourself further."  The staff of
ficer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.  The farther forward and n
earer the enemy he went, the more orderly and cheerful were the troops. The great
est disorder and depression had been in the baggage train he had passed that morn
ing on the Znaim road seven miles away from the French. At Grunth also some appre
hension and alarm could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French 
lines the more confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in their 
greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and company officers were co
unting the men, poking the last man in each section in the ribs and telling him t
o hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered over the whole place were dragging logs an
d brushwood and were building shelters with merry chatter and laughter around the
 fires sat others, dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or me
nding boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers. In 
one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly at the steamin
g boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermaster sergeant was carrying in
 a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log before his shelter, had been tasted
.  Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka, crowded roun
d a pockmarked, broadshouldered sergeant major who, tilting a keg, filled one aft
er another the canteen lids held out to him. The soldiers lifted the canteen lids
 to their lips with reverential faces, emptied them, rolling the vodka in their m
ouths, and walked away from the sergeant major with brightened expressions, licki
ng their lips and wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats. All their faces
 were as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful encampmen
t, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in which at least half of t
hem would be left on the field. After passing a chasseur regiment and in the line
s of the Kiev grenadiersfine fellows busy with similar peaceful affairsnear the s
helter of the regimental commander, higher than and different from the others, Pr
ince Andrew came out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked 
man. Two soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and s
triking him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally. A stout maj
or was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the screams kept repeating 
 "It's a shame for a soldier to steal a soldier must be honest, honorable, and br
ave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in him, he's a scoundrel. Go on
! Go on!"  So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnatural 
screams, continued.  "Go on, go on!" said the major.  A young officer with a bewi
ldered and pained expression on his face stepped away from the man and looked rou
nd inquiringly at the adjutant as he rode by.  Prince Andrew, having reached the 
front line, rode along it. Our front line and that of the enemy were far apart on
 the right and left flanks, but in the center where the men with a flag of truce 
had passed that morning, the lines were so near together that the men could see o
ne another's faces and speak to one another. Besides the soldiers who formed the 
picket line on either side, there were many curious onlookers who, jesting and la
ughing, stared at their strange foreign enemies.  Since early morningdespite an i
njunction not to approach the picket linethe officers had been unable to keep sig
htseers away. The soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a cur
iosity, no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sightseers and g
rew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look at the Fren
ch.  "Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to a Russian
 musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and was rapidly and
 excitedly talking to a French grenadier. "Hark to him jabbering! Fine, isn't it?
 It's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with him. There now, Sidorov!"  "Wait a b
it and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who was considered an adept at Frenc
h.  The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov. Prince Andrew recogni
zed him and stopped to listen to what he was saying. Dolokhov had come from the l
eft flank where their regiment was stationed, with his captain.  "Now then, go on
, go on!" incited the officer, bending forward and trying not to lose a word of t
he speech which was incomprehensible to him. "More, please more! What's he saying
?"  Dolokhov did not answer the captain he had been drawn into a hot dispute with
 the French grenadier. They were naturally talking about the campaign. The French
man, confusing the Austrians with the Russians, was trying to prove that the Russ
ians had surrendered and had fled all the way from Ulm, while Dolokhov maintained
 that the Russians had not surrendered but had beaten the French.  "We have order
s to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off," said Dolokhov.  "Only take 
care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" said the French grenadier.  The
 French onlookers and listeners laughed.  "We'll make you dance as we did under S
uvorov...," * said Dolokhov.       * "On vous fera danser."   "Qu' estce qu'il ch
ante?" * asked a Frenchman.       * "What's he singing about?"   "It's ancient hi
story," said another, guessing that it referred to a former war. "The Emperor wil
l teach your Suvara as he has taught the others..."  "Bonaparte..." began Dolokho
v, but the Frenchman interrupted him.  "Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacre n
om...!" cried he angrily.  "The devil skin your Emperor."  And Dolokhov swore at 
him in coarse soldier's Russian and shouldering his musket walked away.  "Let us 
go, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain.  "Ah, that's the way to talk French," s
aid the picket soldiers. "Now, Sidorov, you have a try!"  Sidorov, turning to the
 French, winked, and began to jabber meaningless sounds very fast "Kari, mala, ta
fa, safi, muter, Kaska," he said, trying to give an expressive intonation to his 
voice.  "Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthy and go
odhumored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French involuntarily, s
o much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be to unload the muskets, expl
ode the ammunition, and all return home as quickly as possible.  But the guns rem
ained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses and entrenchments looked out just as m
enacingly, and the unlimbered cannon confronted one another as before.      CHAPT
ER XVI   Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, Prince Andr
ew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had told him the w
hole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stopped beside the farthest of 
the four unlimbered cannon. Before the guns an artillery sentry was pacing up and
 down he stood at attention when the officer arrived, but at a sign resumed his m
easured, monotonous pacing. Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther 
back picket ropes and artillerymen's bonfires. To the left, not far from the fart
hest cannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle shed from which came the sound
 of officers' voices in eager conversation.  It was true that a view over nearly 
the whole Russian position and the greater part of the enemy's opened out from th
is battery. Just facing it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Sch
on Grabern could be seen, and in three places to left and right the French troops
 amid the smoke of their campfires, the greater part of whom were evidently in th
e village itself and behind the hill. To the left from that village, amid the smo
ke, was something resembling a battery, but it was impossible to see it clearly w
ith the naked eye. Our right flank was posted on a rather steep incline which dom
inated the French position. Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthes
t point the dragoons. In the center, where Tushin's battery stood and from which 
Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most direct descent
 and ascent to the brook separating us from Schon Grabern. On the left our troops
 were close to a copse, in which smoked the bonfires of our infantry who were fel
ling wood. The French line was wider than ours, and it was plain that they could 
easily outflank us on both sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, m
aking it difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took out hi
s notebook and, leaning on the cannon, sketched a plan of the position. He made s
ome notes on two points, intending to mention them to Bagration. His idea was, fi
rst, to concentrate all the artillery in the center, and secondly, to withdraw th
e cavalry to the other side of the dip. Prince Andrew, being always near the comm
ander in chief, closely following the mass movements and general orders, and cons
tantly studying historical accounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself
 the course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline. He imagined onl
y important possibilities "If the enemy attacks the right flank," he said to hims
elf, "the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs must hold their position till
 reserves from the center come up. In that case the dragoons could successfully m
ake a flank counterattack. If they attack our center we, having the center batter
y on this high ground, shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat
 to the dip by echelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had been beside the 
gun, he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly, but as often happens had
 not understood a word of what they were saying. Suddenly, however, he was struck
 by a voice coming from the shed, and its tone was so sincere that he could not b
ut listen.  "No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a f
amiliar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know what is beyond dea
th, none of us would be afraid of it. That's so, friend."  Another, a younger voi
ce, interrupted him "Afraid or not, you can't escape it anyhow."  "All the same, 
one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third manly voice interrupting them
 both. "Of course you artillery men are very wise, because you can take everythin
g along with youvodka and snacks."  And the owner of the manly voice, evidently a
n infantry officer, laughed.  "Yes, one is afraid," continued the first speaker, 
he of the familiar voice. "One is afraid of the unknown, that's what it is. Whate
ver we may say about the soul going to the sky... we know there is no sky but onl
y an atmosphere."  The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.  "Wel
l, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said.  "Why," thought Prince And
rew, "that's the captain who stood up in the sutler's hut without his boots." He 
recognized the agreeable, philosophizing voice with pleasure.  "Some herb vodka? 
Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive a future life..."  He did not fi
nish. Just then there was a whistle in the air nearer and nearer, faster and loud
er, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if it had not finished saying what was n
ecessary, thudded into the ground near the shed with super human force, throwing 
up a mass of earth. The ground seemed to groan at the terrible impact.  And immed
iately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth and his kind, intelli
gent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed followed by the owner of the manly 
voice, a dashing infantry officer who hurried off to his company, buttoning up hi
s coat as he ran.      CHAPTER XVII   Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew ling
ered with the battery, looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. H
is eyes ran rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hitherto motion
less masses of the French now swayed and that there really was a battery to their
 left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Two mounted Frenchmen, probably 
adjutants, were galloping up the hill. A small but distinctly visible enemy colum
n was moving down the hill, probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of t
he first shot had not yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a r
eport. The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back to 
Grunth to find Prince Bagration. He heard the cannonade behind him growing louder
 and more frequent. Evidently our guns had begun to reply. From the bottom of the
 slope, where the parleys had taken place, came the report of musketry.  Lemarroi
s had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte's stern letter, and Murat, humiliat
ed and anxious to expiate his fault, had at once moved his forces to attack the c
enter and outflank both the Russian wings, hoping before evening and before the a
rrival of the Emperor to crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.
  "It has begun. Here it is!" thought Prince Andrew, feeling the blood rush to hi
s heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"  Passing between the 
companies that had been eating porridge and drinking vodka a quarter of an hour b
efore, he saw everywhere the same rapid movement of soldiers forming ranks and ge
tting their muskets ready, and on all their faces he recognized the same eagernes
s that filled his heart. "It has begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!" was 
what the face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.  Before he had reac
hed the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw, in the light of the dull a
utumn evening, mounted men coming toward him. The foremost, wearing a Cossack clo
ak and lambskin cap and riding a white horse, was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrew
 stopped, waiting for him to come up Prince Bagration reined in his horse and rec
ognizing Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew t
old him what he had seen.  The feeling, "It has begun! Here it is!" was seen even
 on Prince Bagration's hard brown face with its halfclosed, dull, sleepy eyes. Pr
ince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face and wished he cou
ld tell what, if anything, this man was thinking and feeling at that moment. "Is 
there anything at all behind that impassive face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as
 he looked. Prince Bagration bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince 
Andrew told him, and said, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply that every
thing that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen. P
rince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke quickly. Prince Bagration,
 uttering his words with an Oriental accent, spoke particularly slowly, as if to 
impress the fact that there was no need to hurry. However, he put his horse to a 
trot in the direction of Tushin's battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite.
 Behind Prince Bagration rode an officer of the suite, the prince's personal adju
tant, Zherkov, an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty, riding a fine bobta
iled horse, and a civilianan accountant who had asked permission to be present at
 the battle out of curiosity. The accountant, a stout, fullfaced man, looked arou
nd him with a naive smile of satisfaction and presented a strange appearance amon
g the hussars, Cossacks, and adjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on his h
orse with a convoy officer's saddle.  "He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to
 Bolkonski, pointing to the accountant, "but he feels a pain in the pit of his st
omach already."  "Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beaming but rather c
unning smile, as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov's joke, and pu
rposely trying to appear stupider than he really was.  "It is very strange, mon M
onsieur Prince," said the staff officer. He remembered that in French there is so
me peculiar way of addressing a prince, but could not get it quite right.  By thi
s time they were all approaching Tushin's battery, and a ball struck the ground i
n front of them.  "What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naiv
e smile.  "A French pancake," answered Zherkov.  "So that's what they hit with?" 
asked the accountant. "How awful!"  He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had 
hardly finished speaking when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling 
which suddenly ended with a thud into something soft... ffflop! and a Cossack, ri
ding a little to their right and behind the accountant, crashed to earth with his
 horse. Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and turned their ho
rses away. The accountant stopped, facing the Cossack, and examined him with atte
ntive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but the horse still struggled.  Prince Bag
ration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing the cause of the confusion,
 turned away with indifference, as if to say, "Is it worth while noticing trifles
?" He reined in his horse with the case of a skillful rider and, slightly bending
 over, disengaged his saber which had caught in his cloak. It was an oldfashioned
 saber of a kind no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of 
Suvorov giving his saber to Bagration in Italy, and the recollection was particul
arly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery at which Prince Andrew
 had been when he examined the battlefield.  "Whose company?" asked Prince Bagrat
ion of an artilleryman standing by the ammunition wagon.  He asked, "Whose compan
y?" but he really meant, "Are you frightened here?" and the artilleryman understo
od him.  "Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the redhaired, freckled gun
ner in a merry voice, standing to attention.  "Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as i
f considering something, and he rode past the limbers to the farthest cannon.  As
 he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his suite, and in
 the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see the gunners who had se
ized it straining to roll it quickly back to its former position. A huge, broadsh
ouldered gunner, Number One, holding a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the whe
el while Number Two with a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon's mouth. 
The short, roundshouldered Captain Tushin, stumbling over the tail of the gun car
riage, moved forward and, not noticing the general, looked out shading his eyes w
ith his small hand.  "Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he
 in a feeble voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill suited to his 
weak figure. "Number Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"  Bagration called to hi
m, and Tushin, raising three fingers to his cap with a bashful and awkward gestur
e not at all like a military salute but like a priest's benediction, approached t
he general. Though Tushin's guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he wa
s firing incendiary balls at the village of Schon Grabern visible just opposite, 
in front of which large masses of French were advancing.  No one had given Tushin
 orders where and at what to fire, but after consulting his sergeant major, Zakha
rchenko, for whom he had great respect, he had decided that it would be a good th
ing to set fire to the village. "Very good!" said Bagration in reply to the offic
er's report, and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended bef
ore him. The French had advanced nearest on our right. Below the height on which 
the Kiev regiment was stationed, in the hollow where the rivulet flowed, the soul
stirring rolling and crackling of musketry was heard, and much farther to the rig
ht beyond the dragoons, the officer of the suite pointed out to Bagration a Frenc
h column that was outflanking us. To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent
 wood. Prince Bagration ordered two battalions from the center to be sent to rein
force the right flank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince 
that if these battalions went away, the guns would remain without support. Prince
 Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked at him in silence.
 It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's remark was just and that really no
 answer could be made to it. But at that moment an adjutant galloped up with a me
ssage from the commander of the regiment in the hollow and news that immense mass
es of the French were coming down upon them and that his regiment was in disorder
 and was retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Prince Bagration bowed his head in 
sign of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk to the right and sent an adjut
ant to the dragoons with orders to attack the French. But this adjutant returned 
half an hour later with the news that the commander of the dragoons had already r
etreated beyond the dip in the ground, as a heavy fire had been opened on him and
 he was losing men uselessly, and so had hastened to throw some sharpshooters int
o the wood.  "Very good!" said Bagration.  As he was leaving the battery, firing 
was heard on the left also, and as it was too far to the left flank for him to ha
ve time to go there himself, Prince Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general in
 command the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutuzov at Braunau that he m
ust retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear, as the right fl
ank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy's attack very long. About T
ushin and the battalion that had been in support of his battery all was forgotten
. Prince Andrew listened attentively to Bagration's colloquies with the commandin
g officers and the orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders
 were really given, but that Prince Bagration tried to make it appear that everyt
hing done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of subordinate commanders was
 done, if not by his direct command, at least in accord with his intentions. Prin
ce Andrew noticed, however, that though what happened was due to chance and was i
ndependent of the commander's will, owing to the tact Bagration showed, his prese
nce was very valuable. Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances be
came calm soldiers and officers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in his pres
ence, and were evidently anxious to display their courage before him.      CHAPTE
R XVIII   Prince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our right flank, 
began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but where on accoun
t of the smoke nothing could be seen. The nearer they got to the hollow the less 
they could see but the more they felt the nearness of the actual battlefield. The
y began to meet wounded men. One with a bleeding head and no cap was being dragge
d along by two soldiers who supported him under the arms. There was a gurgle in h
is throat and he was spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat
 or mouth. Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket, groani
ng aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt, while blood from it was s
treaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle. He had that moment been wounded and
 his face showed fear rather than suffering. Crossing a road they descended a ste
ep incline and saw several men lying on the ground they also met a crowd of soldi
ers some of whom were unwounded. The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing h
eavily, and despite the general's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating.
 In front of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through the smoke, and
 an officer catching sight of Bagration rushed shouting after the crowd of retrea
ting soldiers, ordering them back. Bagration rode up to the ranks along which sho
ts crackled now here and now there, drowning the sound of voices and the shouts o
f command. The whole air reeked with smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers wer
e blackened with it. Some were using their ramrods, others putting powder on the 
touchpans or taking charges from their pouches, while others were firing, though 
who they were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which there was no wind t
o carry away. A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets were often heard. "What
 is this?" thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowd of soldiers. "It can't be 
an attack, for they are not moving it can't be a squarefor they are not drawn up 
for that."  The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeblelooking old man with a p
leasant smilehis eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes, giving him a 
mild expression, rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as a host welcomes an hono
red guest. He reported that his regiment had been attacked by French cavalry and 
that, though the attack had been repulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He
 said the attack had been repulsed, employing this military term to describe what
 had occurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know what had ha
ppened during that halfhour to the troops entrusted to him, and could not say wit
h certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or his regiment had been broken 
up. All he knew was that at the commencement of the action balls and shells began
 flying all over his regiment and hitting men and that afterwards someone had sho
uted "Cavalry!" and our men had begun firing. They were still firing, not at the 
cavalry which had disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the hollo
w and were firing at our men. Prince Bagration bowed his head as a sign that this
 was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning to his adjutant he ordered
 him to bring down the two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just p
assed. Prince Andrew was struck by the changed expression on Prince Bagration's f
ace at this moment. It expressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on
 the face of a man who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the wa
ter. The dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation of prof
ound thought. The round, steady, hawk's eyes looked before him eagerly and rather
 disdainfully, not resting on anything although his movements were still slow and
 measured.  The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreating 
him to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were. "Please, your e
xcellency, for God's sake!" he kept saying, glancing for support at an officer of
 the suite who turned away from him. "There, you see!" and he drew attention to t
he bullets whistling, singing, and hissing continually around them. He spoke in t
he tone of entreaty and reproach that a carpenter uses to a gentleman who has pic
ked up an ax "We are used to it, but you, sir, will blister your hands." He spoke
 as if those bullets could not kill him, and his halfclosed eyes gave still more 
persuasiveness to his words. The staff officer joined in the colonel's appeals, b
ut Bagration did not reply he only gave an order to cease firing and reform, so a
s to give room for the two approaching battalions. While he was speaking, the cur
tain of smoke that had concealed the hollow, driven by a rising wind, began to mo
ve from right to left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the hill opposite, wi
th the French moving about on it, opened out before them. All eyes fastened invol
untarily on this French column advancing against them and winding down over the u
neven ground. One could already see the soldiers' shaggy caps, distinguish the of
ficers from the men, and see the standard flapping against its staff.  "They marc
h splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.  The head of the column had
 already descended into the hollow. The clash would take place on this side of it
...  The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed up and m
oved to the right from behind it, dispersing the laggards, came two battalions of
 the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they had reached Bagration, the weight
y tread of the mass of men marching in step could be heard. On their left flank, 
nearest to Bagration, marched a company commander, a fine roundfaced man, with a 
stupid and happy expressionthe same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At
 that moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow he would
 appear as he passed the commander.  With the selfsatisfaction of a man on parade
, he stepped lightly with his muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himse
lf to his full height without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with the 
heavy tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He carried close to h
is leg a narrow unsheathed sword small, curved, and not like a real weapon and lo
oked now at the superior officers and now back at the men without losing step, hi
s whole powerful body turning flexibly. It was as if all the powers of his soul w
ere concentrated on passing the commander in the best possible manner, and feelin
g that he was doing it well he was happy. "Left... left... left..." he seemed to 
repeat to himself at each alternate step and in time to this, with stern but vari
ed faces, the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched in ste
p, and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeating to himself a
t each alternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat major skirted a bush, puff
ing and falling out of step a soldier who had fallen behind, his face showing ala
rm at his defection, ran at a trot, panting to catch up with his company. A canno
n ball, cleaving the air, flew over the heads of Bagration and his suite, and fel
l into the column to the measure of "Left... left!" "Close up!" came the company 
commander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers passed in a semicircle round some
thing where the ball had fallen, and an old trooper on the flank, a noncommission
ed officer who had stopped beside the dead men, ran to catch up his line and, fal
ling into step with a hop, looked back angrily, and through the ominous silence a
nd the regular tramp of feet beating the ground in unison, one seemed to hear lef
t... left... left.  "Well done, lads!" said Prince Bagration.  "Glad to do our be
st, your ex'lenlency!" came a confused shout from the ranks. A morose soldier mar
ching on the left turned his eyes on Bagration as he shouted, with an expression 
that seemed to say "We know that ourselves!" Another, without looking round, as t
hough fearing to relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.  The orde
r was given to halt and down knapsacks.  Bagration rode round the ranks that had 
marched past him and dismounted. He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and han
ded over his felt coat, stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of
 the French column, with its officers leading, appeared from below the hill.  "Fo
rward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorous voice, turning for a mo
ment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms, he went forward uneasily 
over the rough field with the awkward gait of a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt th
at an invisible power was leading him forward, and experienced great happiness.  
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagration, could clea
rly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even their faces. He distinct
ly saw an old French officer who, with gaitered legs and turnedout toes, climbed 
the hill with difficulty. Prince Bagration gave no further orders and silently co
ntinued to walk on in front of the ranks. Suddenly one shot after another rang ou
t from the French, smoke appeared all along their uneven ranks, and musket shots 
sounded. Several of our men fell, among them the roundfaced officer who had march
ed so gaily and complacently. But at the moment the first report was heard, Bagra
tion looked round and shouted, "Hurrah!"  "Hurrahah!ah!" rang a longdrawn shout f
rom our ranks, and passing Bagration and racing one another they rushed in an irr
egular but joyous and eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.      CHA
PTER XIX   The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our right fla
nk. In the center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managed to set fire to th
e Schon Grabern village, delayed the French advance. The French were putting out 
the fire which the wind was spreading, and thus gave us time to retreat. The reti
rement of the center to the other side of the dip in the ground at the rear was h
urried and noisy, but the different companies did not get mixed. But our leftwhic
h consisted of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlograd hussarswas simulta
neously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces under Lannes and was th
rown into confusion. Bagration had sent Zherkov to the general commanding that le
ft flank with orders to retreat immediately.  Zherkov, not removing his hand from
 his cap, turned his horse about and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagr
ation than his courage failed him. He was seized by panic and could not go where 
it was dangerous.  Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front w
here the firing was, he began to look for the general and his staff where they co
uld not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.  The command of the left f
lank belonged by seniority to the commander of the regiment Kutuzov had reviewed 
at Braunau and in which Dolokhov was serving as a private. But the command of the
 extreme left flank had been assigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regiment 
in which Rostov was serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two commanders wer
e much exasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on the r
ight flank and the French were already advancing, were engaged in discussion with
 the sole object of offending one another. But the regiments, both cavalry and in
fantry, were by no means ready for the impending action. From privates to general
 they were not expecting a battle and were engaged in peaceful occupations, the c
avalry feeding the horses and the infantry collecting wood.  "He higher iss dan I
 in rank," said the German colonel of the hussars, flushing and addressing an adj
utant who had ridden up, "so let him do what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my h
ussars... Bugler, sount ze retreat!"  But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon a
nd musketry, mingling together, thundered on the right and in the center, while t
he capotes of Lannes' sharpshooters were already seen crossing the milldam and fo
rming up within twice the range of a musket shot. The general in command of the i
nfantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and having mounted drew himself u
p very straight and tall and rode to the Pavlograd commander. The commanders met 
with polite bows but with secret malevolence in their hearts.  "Once again, Colon
el," said the general, "I can't leave half my men in the wood. I beg of you, I be
g of you," he repeated, "to occupy the position and prepare for an attack."  "I p
eg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!" suddenly replied the 
irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."  "I am not in the cavalry, Colonel
, but I am a Russian general and if you are not aware of the fact..."  "Quite ava
re, your excellency," suddenly shouted the colonel, touching his horse and turnin
g purple in the face. "Vill you be so goot to come to ze front and see dat zis po
sition iss no goot? I don't vish to destroy my men for your pleasure!"  "You forg
et yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure and I won't allow it t
o be said!"  Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, the gen
eral expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the front line, as if t
heir differences would be settled there amongst the bullets. They reached the fro
nt, several bullets sped over them, and they halted in silence. There was nothing
 fresh to be seen from the line, for from where they had been before it had been 
evident that it was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and broken gro
und, as well as that the French were outflanking our left. The general and colone
l looked sternly and significantly at one another like two fighting cocks prepari
ng for battle, each vainly trying to detect signs of cowardice in the other. Both
 passed the examination successfully. As there was nothing to be said, and neithe
r wished to give occasion for it to be alleged that he had been the first to leav
e the range of fire, they would have remained there for a long time testing each 
other's courage had it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry 
and a muffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The French had attacked the m
en collecting wood in the copse. It was no longer possible for the hussars to ret
reat with the infantry. They were cut off from the line of retreat on the left by
 the French. However inconvenient the position, it was now necessary to attack in
 order to cut away through for themselves.  The squadron in which Rostov was serv
ing had scarcely time to mount before it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as a
t the Enns bridge, there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and agai
n that terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fearresembling the line separati
ng the living from the deadlay between them. All were conscious of this unseen li
ne, and the question whether they would cross it or not, and how they would cross
 it, agitated them all.  The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply t
o questions put to him by the officers, and, like a man desperately insisting on 
having his own way, gave an order. No one said anything definite, but the rumor o
f an attack spread through the squadron. The command to form up rang out and the 
sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards. Still no one moved. The t
roops of the left flank, infantry and hussars alike, felt that the commander did 
not himself know what to do, and this irresolution communicated itself to the men
.  "If only they would be quick!" thought Rostov, feeling that at last the time h
ad come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had so often heard from hi
s fellow hussars.  "Fo'ward, with God, lads!" rang out Denisov's voice. "At a two
t fo'ward!"  The horses' croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at t
he reins and started of his own accord.  Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the
 front lines of his hussars and still farther ahead a dark line which he could no
t see distinctly but took to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off
.  "Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanks drooping as 
he broke into a gallop.  Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more
 and more elated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had been
 in the middle of the line that had seemed so terribleand now he had crossed that
 line and not only was there nothing terrible, but everything was becoming more a
nd more happy and animated. "Oh, how I will slash at him!" thought Rostov, grippi
ng the hilt of his saber.  "Huraaaah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my
 way now," thought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a ful
l gallop so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy was already visible.
 Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep over the squadron. Rostov 
raised his saber, ready to strike, but at that instant the trooper Nikitenko, who
 was galloping ahead, shot away from him, and Rostov felt as in a dream that he c
ontinued to be carried forward with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the same sp
ot. From behind him Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted against him and looked 
angrily at him. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and galloped past.  "How is it I am no
t moving? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostov asked and answered at the same inst
ant. He was alone in the middle of a field. Instead of the moving horses and huss
ars' backs, he saw nothing before him but the motionless earth and the stubble ar
ound him. There was warm blood under his arm. "No, I am wounded and the horse is 
killed." Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his rider's le
g. Blood was flowing from his head he struggled but could not rise. Rostov also t
ried to rise but fell back, his sabretache having become entangled in the saddle.
 Where our men were, and where the French, he did not know. There was no one near
.  Having disentangled his leg, he rose. "Where, on which side, was now the line 
that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himself and could not answe
r. "Can something bad have happened to me?" he wondered as he got up and at that 
moment he felt that something superfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm. T
he wrist felt as if it were not his. He examined his hand carefully, vainly tryin
g to find blood on it. "Ah, here are people coming," he thought joyfully, seeing 
some men running toward him. "They will help me!" In front came a man wearing a s
trange shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned, and with a hooked nose. Then c
ame two more, and many more running behind. One of them said something strange, n
ot in Russian. In among the hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Ru
ssian hussar. He was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind hi
m.  "It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will take me to
o? Who are these men?" thought Rostov, scarcely believing his eyes. "Can they be 
French?" He looked at the approaching Frenchmen, and though but a moment before h
e had been galloping to get at them and hack them to pieces, their proximity now 
seemed so awful that he could not believe his eyes. "Who are they? Why are they r
unning? Can they be coming at me? And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone is so fon
d of?" He remembered his mother's love for him, and his family's, and his friends
', and the enemy's intention to kill him seemed impossible. "But perhaps they may
 do it!" For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing
 the situation. The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, was already
 so close that the expression of his face could be seen. And the excited, alien f
ace of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holding his breath, and running so lig
htly, frightened Rostov. He seized his pistol and, instead of firing it, flung it
 at the Frenchman and ran with all his might toward the bushes. He did not now ru
n with the feeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridg
e, but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One single sentiment, 
that of fear for his young and happy life, possessed his whole being. Rapidly lea
ping the furrows, he fled across the field with the impetuosity he used to show a
t catchplay, now and then turning his goodnatured, pale, young face to look back.
 A shudder of terror went through him "No, better not look," he thought, but havi
ng reached the bushes he glanced round once more. The French had fallen behind, a
nd just as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and, turning, 
shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostov paused. "No, there's s
ome mistake," thought he. "They can't have wanted to kill me." But at the same ti
me, his left arm felt as heavy as if a seventypound weight were tied to it. He co
uld run no more. The Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostov closed his eyes 
and stooped down. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered his 
last remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, and reached t
he bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.      CHAPTER XX   The in
fantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts of the wood ran o
ut of it, the different companies getting mixed, and retreated as a disorderly cr
owd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered the senseless cry, "Cut off!" that is so t
errible in battle, and that word infected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic
.  "Surrounded! Cut off? We're lost!" shouted the fugitives.  The moment he heard
 the firing and the cry from behind, the general realized that something dreadful
 had happened to his regiment, and the thought that he, an exemplary officer of m
any years' service who had never been to blame, might be held responsible at head
quarters for negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting the rec
alcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and above all quite forg
etting the danger and all regard for selfpreservation, he clutched the crupper of
 his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped to the regiment under a hail of bul
lets which fell around, but fortunately missed him. His one desire was to know wh
at was happening and at any cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made o
ne, so that he, an exemplary officer of twentytwo years' service, who had never b
een censured, should not be held to blame.  Having galloped safely through the Fr
ench, he reached a field behind the copse across which our men, regardless of ord
ers, were running and descending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation whic
h decides the fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldier
s attend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him, contin
ue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem so terrible to th
e soldiers, despite his furious purple countenance distorted out of all likeness 
to his former self, and the flourishing of his saber, the soldiers all continued 
to run, talking, firing into the air, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation
 which decided the fate of battles was evidently culminating in a panic.  The gen
eral had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of the powder smoke and st
opped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at that moment the French who were 
attacking, suddenly and without any apparent reason, ran back and disappeared fro
m the outskirts, and Russian sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was
 Timokhin's company, which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having
 lain in ambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly. Timokhin, armed
 only with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry and such ma
d, drunken determination that, taken by surprise, the French had thrown down thei
r muskets and run. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin, killed a Frenchman at close
 quarters and was the first to seize the surrendering French officer by his colla
r. Our fugitives returned, the battalions reformed, and the French who had nearly
 cut our left flank in half were for the moment repulsed. Our reserve units were 
able to join up, and the fight was at an end. The regimental commander and Major 
Ekonomov had stopped beside a bridge, letting the retreating companies pass by th
em, when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander's stirrup, almost leani
ng against him. The man was wearing a bluish coat of broadcloth, he had no knapsa
ck or cap, his head was bandaged, and over his shoulder a French munition pouch w
as slung. He had an officer's sword in his hand. The soldier was pale, his blue e
yes looked impudently into the commander's face, and his lips were smiling. Thoug
h the commander was occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekonomov, he could n
ot help taking notice of the soldier.  "Your excellency, here are two trophies," 
said Dolokhov, pointing to the French sword and pouch. "I have taken an officer p
risoner. I stopped the company." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spo
ke in abrupt sentences. "The whole company can bear witness. I beg you will remem
ber this, your excellency!"  "All right, all right," replied the commander, and t
urned to Major Ekonomov.  But Dolokhov did not go away he untied the handkerchief
 around his head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.  "A 
bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your excellency!"   Tushin's ba
ttery had been forgotten and only at the very end of the action did Prince Bagrat
ion, still hearing the cannonade in the center, send his orderly staff officer, a
nd later Prince Andrew also, to order the battery to retire as quickly as possibl
e. When the supports attached to Tushin's battery had been moved away in the midd
le of the action by someone's order, the battery had continued firing and was onl
y not captured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyone coul
d have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefended guns. On the 
contrary, the energetic action of that battery led the French to suppose that her
ein the centerthe main Russian forces were concentrated. Twice they had attempted
 to attack this point, but on each occasion had been driven back by grapeshot fro
m the four isolated guns on the hillock.  Soon after Prince Bagration had left hi
m, Tushin had succeeded in setting fire to Schon Grabern.  "Look at them scurryin
g! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine! Grand! Look at the smoke, the smoke!" 
exclaimed the artillerymen, brightening up.  All the guns, without waiting for or
ders, were being fired in the direction of the conflagration. As if urging each o
ther on, the soldiers cried at each shot "Fine! That's good! Look at it... Grand!
" The fire, fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The French columns that 
had advanced beyond the village went back but as though in revenge for this failu
re, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village and began firing them a
t Tushin's battery.  In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck 
in successfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed this batter
y when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, one knocking over two 
horses and another tearing off a munitionwagon driver's leg. Their spirits once r
oused were, however, not diminished, but only changed character. The horses were 
replaced by others from a reserve gun carriage, the wounded were carried away, an
d the four guns were turned against the tengun battery. Tushin's companion office
r had been killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hour seventeen
 of the forty men of the guns' crews had been disabled, but the artillerymen were
 still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they noticed the French appearing below
 them, and then they fired grapeshot at them.  Little Tushin, moving feebly and a
wkwardly, kept telling his orderly to "refill my pipe for that one!" and then, sc
attering sparks from it, ran forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look
 at the French.  "Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept saying, seizing the guns by the wh
eels and working the screws himself.  Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant r
eports which always made him jump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran 
from gun to gun, now aiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about re
placing dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his fee
ble voice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and more animated. 
Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn away from the sight, 
shouting angrily at the men who, as is always the case, hesitated about lifting t
he injured or dead. The soldiers, for the most part handsome fellows and, as is a
lways the case in an artillery company, a head and shoulders taller and twice as 
broad as their officerall looked at their commander like children in an embarrass
ing situation, and the expression on his face was invariably reflected on theirs.
  Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and activity, 
Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of fear, and the thought
 that he might be killed or badly wounded never occurred to him. On the contrary,
 he became more and more elated. It seemed to him that it was a very long time ag
o, almost a day, since he had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and 
that the corner of the field he stood on was wellknown and familiar ground. Thoug
h he thought of everything, considered everything, and did everything the best of
 officers could do in his position, he was in a state akin to feverish delirium o
r drunkenness.  From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle
 and thud of the enemy's cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring faces of t
he crew bustling round the guns, from the sight of the blood of men and horses, f
rom the little puffs of smoke on the enemy's side always followed by a ball flyin
g past and striking the earth, a man, a gun, a horse, from the sight of all these
 things a fantastic world of his own had taken possession of his brain and at tha
t moment afforded him pleasure. The enemy's guns were in his fancy not guns but p
ipes from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker.  "There... he
's puffing again," muttered Tushin to himself, as a small cloud rose from the hil
l and was borne in a streak to the left by the wind.  "Now look out for the ball.
.. we'll throw it back."  "What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, 
standing close by, who heard him muttering.  "Nothing... only a shell..." he answ
ered.  "Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna" * was the name 
his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which was large and of an old 
pattern. The French swarming round their guns seemed to him like ants. In that wo
rld, the handsome drunkard Number One of the second gun's crew was "uncle" Tushin
 looked at him more often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movem
ent. The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishing, now increasi
ng, seemed like someone's breathing. He listened intently to the ebb and flow of 
these sounds.       * Daughter of Matthew.   "Ah! Breathing again, breathing!" he
 muttered to himself.  He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man wh
o was throwing cannon balls at the French with both hands.  "Now then, Matvevna, 
dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was saying as he moved from the gun, when a
 strange, unfamiliar voice called above his head "Captain Tushin! Captain!"  Tush
in turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turned him out of the
 booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice  "Are you mad? You have twic
e been ordered to retreat, and you..."  "Why are they down on me?" thought Tushin
, looking in alarm at his superior.  "I... don't..." he muttered, holding up two 
fingers to his cap. "I..."  But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted t
o say. A cannon ball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his h
orse. He paused, and just as he was about to say something more, another ball sto
pped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.  "Retire! All to retire!" he shou
ted from a distance.  The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived w
ith the same order.  It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to
 the space where Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a bro
ken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses. Blood was gush
ing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers lay several dead men. One ba
ll after another passed over as he approached and he felt a nervous shudder run d
own his spine. But the mere thought of being afraid roused him again. "I cannot b
e afraid," thought he, and dismounted slowly among the guns. He delivered the ord
er and did not leave the battery. He decided to have the guns removed from their 
positions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with Tushin, stepping across th
e bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attended to the removal of
 the guns.  "A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said an art
illeryman to Prince Andrew. "Not like your honor!"  Prince Andrew said nothing to
 Tushin. They were both so busy as to seem not to notice one another. When having
 limbered up the only two cannon that remained uninjured out of the four, they be
gan moving down the hill one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind, Prin
ce Andrew rode up to Tushin.  "Well, till we meet again..." he said, holding out 
his hand to Tushin.  "Goodby, my dear fellow," said Tushin. "Dear soul! Goodby, m
y dear fellow!" and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes.      
CHAPTER XXI   The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke
, hung low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growing dark and the g
low of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous. The cannonade was dying down,
 but the rattle of musketry behind and on the right sounded oftener and nearer. A
s soon as Tushin with his guns, continually driving round or coming upon wounded 
men, was out of range of fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some 
of the staff, among them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twice sent t
o Tushin's battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one another, they all g
ave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed, reprimanding and reproaching h
im. Tushin gave no orders, and, silentlyfearing to speak because at every word he
 felt ready to weep without knowing whyrode behind on his artillery nag. Though t
he orders were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves after troo
ps and begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty infantry officer who jus
t before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's wattle shed was laid, with a bulle
t in his stomach, on "Matvevna's" carriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussa
r cadet, supporting one hand with the other, came up to Tushin and asked for a se
at.  "Captain, for God's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly. "For God's sak
e... I can't walk. For God's sake!"  It was plain that this cadet had already rep
eatedly asked for a lift and been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voic
e.  "Tell them to give me a seat, for God's sake!"  "Give him a seat," said Tushi
n. "Lay a cloak for him to sit on, lad," he said, addressing his favorite soldier
. "And where is the wounded officer?"  "He has been set down. He died," replied s
omeone.  "Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak, Ant
onov."  The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other he was pale an
d his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed on "Matvevna," the gun fr
om which they had removed the dead officer. The cloak they spread under him was w
et with blood which stained his breeches and arm.  "What, are you wounded, my lad
?" said Tushin, approaching the gun on which Rostov sat.  "No, it's a sprain."  "
Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin.  "It was the offic
er, your honor, stained it," answered the artilleryman, wiping away the blood wit
h his coat sleeve, as if apologizing for the state of his gun.  It was all that t
hey could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the infantry, and having reache
d the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. It had grown so dark that one could no
t distinguish the uniforms ten paces off, and the firing had begun to subside. Su
ddenly, near by on the right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of sh
ot gleamed in the darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldie
rs who had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of the village ag
ain, but Tushin's guns could not move, and the artillerymen, Tushin, and the cade
t exchanged silent glances as they awaited their fate. The firing died down and s
oldiers, talking eagerly, streamed out of a side street.  "Not hurt, Petrov?" ask
ed one.  "We've given it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now," said a
nother.  "You couldn't see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows! Nothing c
ould be seen. Pitchdark, brother! Isn't there something to drink?"  The French ha
d been repulsed for the last time. And again and again in the complete darkness T
ushin's guns moved forward, surrounded by the humming infantry as by a frame.  In
 the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing always in on
e direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound of hoofs and wheels. Am
id the general rumble, the groans and voices of the wounded were more distinctly 
heard than any other sound in the darkness of the night. The gloom that enveloped
 the army was filled with their groans, which seemed to melt into one with the da
rkness of the night. After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode 
past on a white horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing "What 
did he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eager questions fr
om all sides. The whole moving mass began pressing closer together and a report s
pread that they were ordered to halt evidently those in front had halted. All rem
ained where they were in the middle of the muddy road.  Fires were lighted and th
e talk became more audible. Captain Tushin, having given orders to his company, s
ent a soldier to find a dressing station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down 
by a bonfire the soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostov, too, dragged himself t
o the fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his whole body.
 Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by an excruciating 
pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactory position. He kept closin
g his eyes and then again looking at the fire, which seemed to him dazzlingly red
, and at the feeble, roundshouldered figure of Tushin who was sitting crosslegged
 like a Turk beside him. Tushin's large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with s
ympathy and commiseration on Rostov, who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wis
hed to help him but could not.  From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk 
of the infantry, who were walking, driving past, and settling down all around. Th
e sound of voices, the tramping feet, the horses' hoofs moving in mud, the crackl
ing of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.  It was no lon
ger, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through the gloom, but a dark sea sw
elling and gradually subsiding after a storm. Rostov looked at and listened listl
essly to what passed before and around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squa
tted on his heels, held his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.  "You d
on't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company, your honor. I don'
t know where... such bad luck!"  With the soldier, an infantry officer with a ban
daged cheek came up to the bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the g
uns moved a trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed
 to the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately, each trying to s
natch from the other a boot they were both holding on to.  "You picked it up?... 
I dare say! You're very smart!" one of them shouted hoarsely.  Then a thin, pale 
soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg band, came up and in angry ton
es asked the artillerymen for water.  "Must one die like a dog?" said he.  Tushin
 told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier ran up, begging a 
little fire for the infantry.  "A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good lu
ck to you, fellow countrymen. Thanks for the firewe'll return it with interest," 
said he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.  Next came four soldier
s, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passed by the fire. One of them stumb
led.  "Who the devil has put the logs on the road?" snarled he.  "He's deadwhy ca
rry him?" said another.  "Shut up!"  And they disappeared into the darkness with 
their load.  "Still aching?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper.  "Yes."  "Your hon
or, you're wanted by the general. He is in the hut here," said a gunner, coming u
p to Tushin.  "Coming, friend."  Tushin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pul
ling it straight, walked away from the fire.  Not far from the artillery campfire
, in a hut that had been prepared for him, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talkin
g with some commanding officers who had gathered at his quarters. The little old 
man with the halfclosed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and the ge
neral who had served blamelessly for twentytwo years, flushed by a glass of vodka
 and the dinner and the staff officer with the signet ring, and Zherkov, uneasily
 glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew, pale, with compressed lips and feverish
ly glittering eyes.  In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the Fr
ench, and the accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture, shaking his
 head in perplexityperhaps because the banner really interested him, perhaps beca
use it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at a dinner where there was
 no place for him. In the next hut there was a French colonel who had been taken 
prisoner by our dragoons. Our officers were flocking in to look at him. Prince Ba
gration was thanking the individual commanders and inquiring into details of the 
action and our losses. The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau w
as informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn from th
e wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing the French to pass h
im, had made a bayonet charge with two battalions and had broken up the French tr
oops.  "When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion was disorganized,
 I stopped in the road and thought 'I'll let them come on and will meet them with
 the fire of the whole battalion'and that's what I did."  The general had so wish
ed to do this and was so sorry he had not managed to do it that it seemed to him 
as if it had really happened. Perhaps it might really have been so? Could one pos
sibly make out amid all that confusion what did or did not happen?  "By the way, 
your excellency, I should inform you," he continuedremembering Dolokhov's convers
ation with Kutuzov and his last interview with the gentlemanranker"that Private D
olokhov, who was reduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my prese
nce and particularly distinguished himself."  "I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack
 there, your excellency," chimed in Zherkov, looking uneasily around. He had not 
seen the hussars all that day, but had heard about them from an infantry officer.
 "They broke up two squares, your excellency."  Several of those present smiled a
t Zherkov's words, expecting one of his usual jokes, but noticing that what he wa
s saying redounded to the glory of our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a
 serious expression, though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie d
evoid of any foundation. Prince Bagration turned to the old colonel  "Gentlemen, 
I thank you all all arms have behaved heroically infantry, cavalry, and artillery
. How was it that two guns were abandoned in the center?" he inquired, searching 
with his eyes for someone. Prince Bagration did not ask about the guns on the lef
t flank he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at the very beginning 
of the action. "I think I sent you?" he added, turning to the staff officer on du
ty.  "One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other I can't unders
tand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only just left.... It is tru
e that it was hot there," he added, modestly.  Someone mentioned that Captain Tus
hin was bivouacking close to the village and had already been sent for.  "Oh, but
 you were there?" said Prince Bagration, addressing Prince Andrew.  "Of course, w
e only just missed one another," said the staff officer, with a smile to Bolkonsk
i.  "I had not the pleasure of seeing you," said Prince Andrew, coldly and abrupt
ly.  All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way timidly f
rom behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past the generals in the crow
ded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by the sight of his superiors, he d
id not notice the staff of the banner and stumbled over it. Several of those pres
ent laughed.  "How was it a gun was abandoned?" asked Bagration, frowning, not so
 much at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkov laughed lo
udest.  Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guilt 
and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present themselv
es to Tushin in all their horror. He had been so excited that he had not thought 
about it until that moment. The officers' laughter confused him still more. He st
ood before Bagration with his lower jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter "
I don't know... your excellency... I had no men... your excellency."  "You might 
have taken some from the covering troops."  Tushin did not say that there were no
 covering troops, though that was perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some o
ther officer into trouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolbo
y who has blundered looks at an examiner.  The silence lasted some time. Prince B
agration, apparently not wishing to be severe, found nothing to say the others di
d not venture to intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows a
nd his fingers twitched nervously.  "Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the si
lence with his abrupt voice, "you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's bat
tery. I went there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two gu
ns smashed, and no supports at all."  Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equ
al intentness at Bolkonski, who spoke with suppressed agitation.  "And, if your e
xcellency will allow me to express my opinion," he continued, "we owe today's suc
cess chiefly to the action of that battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Tu
shin and his company," and without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left 
the table.  Prince Bagration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to show distru
st in Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it, bent 
his head, and told Tushin that he could go. Prince Andrew went out with him.  "Th
ank you you saved me, my dear fellow!" said Tushin.  Prince Andrew gave him a loo
k, but said nothing and went away. He felt sad and depressed. It was all so stran
ge, so unlike what he had hoped.   "Who are they? Why are they here? What do they
 want? And when will all this end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shado
ws before him. The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistible dro
wsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and the impression of 
those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged with the physical pain. I
t was they, these soldierswounded and unwoundedit was they who were crushing, wei
ghing down, and twisting the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm a
nd shoulder. To rid himself of them he closed his eyes.  For a moment he dozed, b
ut in that short interval innumerable things appeared to him in a dream his mothe
r and her large white hand, Sonya's thin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and lau
ghter, Denisov with his voice and mustache, and Telyanin and all that affair with
 Telyanin and Bogdanich. That affair was the same thing as this soldier with the 
harsh voice, and it was that affair and this soldier that were so agonizingly, in
cessantly pulling and pressing his arm and always dragging it in one direction. H
e tried to get away from them, but they would not for an instant let his shoulder
 move a hair's breadth. It would not acheit would be wellif only they did not pul
l it, but it was impossible to get rid of them.  He opened his eyes and looked up
. The black canopy of night hung less than a yard above the glow of the charcoal.
 Flakes of falling snow were fluttering in that light. Tushin had not returned, t
he doctor had not come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting na
ked at the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body.  "Nobody wants m
e!" thought Rostov. "There is no one to help me or pity me. Yet I was once at hom
e, strong, happy, and loved." He sighed and, doing so, groaned involuntarily.  "E
h, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking his shirt out over the fi
re, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and added "What a lot of men ha
ve been crippled todayfrightful!"  Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looke
d at the snowflakes fluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at 
his warm, bright home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, his healt
hy body, and all the affection and care of his family. "And why did I come here?"
 he wondered.  Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remna
nt of Bagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.      BOOK THREE 1805
      CHAPTER I   Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his pl
ans. Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage. He was mer
ely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had become a habit. 
Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted to himself, but which fo
rmed the whole interest of his life, were constantly shaping themselves in his mi
nd, arising from the circumstances and persons he met. Of these plans he had not 
merely one or two in his head but dozens, some only beginning to form themselves,
 some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. He did not, 
for instance, say to himself "This man now has influence, I must gain his confide
nce and friendship and through him obtain a special grant." Nor did he say to him
self "Pierre is a rich man, I must entice him to marry my daughter and lend me th
e forty thousand rubles I need." But when he came across a man of position his in
stinct immediately told him that this man could be useful, and without any premed
itation Prince Vasili took the first opportunity to gain his confidence, flatter 
him, become intimate with him, and finally make his request.  He had Pierre at ha
nd in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as Gentleman of the Bedchamber, 
which at that time conferred the status of Councilor of State, and insisted on th
e young man accompanying him to Petersburg and staying at his house. With apparen
t absentmindedness, yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right t
hing, Prince Vasili did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter. Had he th
ought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural and shown such u
naffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both above and below him in s
ocial standing. Something always drew him toward those richer and more powerful t
han himself and he had rare skill in seizing the most opportune moment for making
 use of people.  Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man, 
felt himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and preo
ccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had to sign papers, to 
present himself at government offices, the purpose of which was not clear to him,
 to question his chief steward, to visit his estate near Moscow, and to receive m
any people who formerly did not even wish to know of his existence but would now 
have been offended and grieved had he chosen not to see them. These different peo
plebusinessmen, relations, and acquaintances alikewere all disposed to treat the 
young heir in the most friendly and flattering manner they were all evidently fir
mly convinced of Pierre's noble qualities. He was always hearing such words as "W
ith your remarkable kindness," or, "With your excellent heart," "You are yourself
 so honorable Count," or, "Were he as clever as you," and so on, till he began si
ncerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and extraordinary intelligence
, the more so as in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that he re
ally was very kind and intelligent. Even people who had formerly been spiteful to
ward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate. The angry e
ldest princess, with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll's, had co
me into Pierre's room after the funeral. With drooping eyes and frequent blushes 
she told him she was very sorry about their past misunderstandings and did not no
w feel she had a right to ask him for anything, except only for permission, after
 the blow she had received, to remain for a few weeks longer in the house she so 
loved and where she had sacrificed so much. She could not refrain from weeping at
 these words. Touched that this statuesque princess could so change, Pierre took 
her hand and begged her forgiveness, without knowing what for. From that day the 
eldest princess quite changed toward Pierre and began knitting a striped scarf fo
r him.  "Do this for my sake, mon cher after all, she had to put up with a great 
deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handing him a deed to sign fo
r the princess' benefit.  Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was ne
cessary to throw this bonea bill for thirty thousand rublesto the poor princess t
hat it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of the inlaid p
ortfolio. Pierre signed the deed and after that the princess grew still kinder. T
he younger sisters also became affectionate to him, especially the youngest, the 
pretty one with the mole, who often made him feel confused by her smiles and her 
own confusion when meeting him.  It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone sho
uld like him, and it would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that
 he could not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had n
o time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He was always bus
y and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful intoxication. He felt as though
 he were the center of some important and general movement that something was con
stantly expected of him, that if he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint 
many people, but if he did this and that, all would be well and he did what was d
emanded of him, but still that happy result always remained in the future.  More 
than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's affairs and of Pierre
 himself in those early days. From the death of Count Bezukhov he did not let go 
his hold of the lad. He had the air of a man oppressed by business, weary and suf
fering, who yet would not, for pity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after 
all, was the son of his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to 
the caprice of fate and the designs of rogues. During the few days he spent in Mo
scow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he would call Pierre, or go to him himsel
f, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of weariness and assurance, as if
 he were adding every time "You know I am overwhelmed with business and it is pur
ely out of charity that I trouble myself about you, and you also know quite well 
that what I propose is the only thing possible."  "Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow
 we are off at last," said Prince Vasili one day, closing his eyes and fingering 
Pierre's elbow, speaking as if he were saying something which had long since been
 agreed upon and could not now be altered. "We start tomorrow and I'm giving you 
a place in my carriage. I am very glad. All our important business here is now se
ttled, and I ought to have been off long ago. Here is something I have received f
rom the chancellor. I asked him for you, and you have been entered in the diploma
tic corps and made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies 
open before you."  Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these
 words were pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career, wish
ed to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasili interrupted him in the special deep
 cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting his speech, which he use
d in extreme cases when special persuasion was needed.  "Mais, mon cher, I did th
is for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience, and there is nothing to thank me fo
r. No one has ever complained yet of being too much loved and besides, you are fr
ee, you could throw it up tomorrow. But you will see everything for yourself when
 you get to Petersburg. It is high time for you to get away from these terrible r
ecollections." Prince Vasili sighed. "Yes, yes, my boy. And my valet can go in yo
ur carriage. Ah! I was nearly forgetting," he added. "You know, mon cher, your fa
ther and I had some accounts to settle, so I have received what was due from the 
Ryazan estate and will keep it you won't require it. We'll go into the accounts l
ater."  By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant several thou
sand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which the prince had retain
ed for himself.  In Petersburg, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere of
 gentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather the rank for h
e did nothing, that Prince Vasili had procured for him, and acquaintances, invita
tions, and social occupations were so numerous that, even more than in Moscow, he
 felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle, and continual expectation of some good, al
ways in front of him but never attained.  Of his former bachelor acquaintances ma
ny were no longer in Petersburg. The Guards had gone to the front Dolokhov had be
en reduced to the ranks Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces Prince
 Andrew was abroad so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he us
ed to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with a friend old
er than himself and whom he respected. His whole time was taken up with dinners a
nd balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili's house in the company of the sto
ut princess, his wife, and his beautiful daughter Helene.  Like the others, Anna 
Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of attitude toward him that had taken p
lace in society.  Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt th
at what he was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that remarks whi
ch seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish as soon as h
e uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte's stupidest remarks came out clev
er and apt. Now everything Pierre said was charmant. Even if Anna Pavlovna did no
t say so, he could see that she wished to and only refrained out of regard for hi
s modesty.  In the beginning of the winter of 18056 Pierre received one of Anna P
avlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added "You will find t
he beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delightful to see."  When he read tha
t sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that some link which other people reco
gnized had grown up between himself and Helene, and that thought both alarmed him
, as if some obligation were being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and
 pleased him as an entertaining supposition.  Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" was like 
the former one, only the novelty she offered her guests this time was not Mortema
rt, but a diplomatist fresh from Berlin with the very latest details of the Emper
or Alexander's visit to Potsdam, and of how the two august friends had pledged th
emselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justice against the e
nemy of the human race. Anna Pavlovna received Pierre with a shade of melancholy,
 evidently relating to the young man's recent loss by the death of Count Bezukhov
 everyone constantly considered it a duty to assure Pierre that he was greatly af
flicted by the death of the father he had hardly known, and her melancholy was ju
st like the august melancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majest
y the Empress Marya Fedorovna. Pierre felt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovna arran
ged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitual skill. The large g
roup, in which were Prince Vasili and the generals, had the benefit of the diplom
at. Another group was at the tea table. Pierre wished to join the former, but Ann
a Pavlovnawho was in the excited condition of a commander on a battlefield to who
m thousands of new and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put in
 actionseeing Pierre, touched his sleeve with her finger, saying  "Wait a bit, I 
have something in view for you this evening." She glanced at Helene and smiled at
 her. "My dear Helene, be charitable to my poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep 
her company for ten minutes. And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear c
ount who will not refuse to accompany you."  The beauty went to the aunt, but Ann
a Pavlovna detained Pierre, looking as if she had to give some final necessary in
structions.  "Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the stately b
eauty as she glided away. "And how she carries herself! For so young a girl, such
 tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from her heart. Happy the man
 who wins her! With her the least worldly of men would occupy a most brilliant po
sition in society. Don't you think so? I only wanted to know your opinion," and A
nna Pavlovna let Pierre go.  Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to He
lene's perfection of manner. If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of her bea
uty and her remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society.  The old
 aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemed desirous of hiding 
her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to show her fear of Anna Pavlovna. S
he looked at her niece, as if inquiring what she was to do with these people. On 
leaving them, Anna Pavlovna again touched Pierre's sleeve, saying "I hope you won
't say that it is dull in my house again," and she glanced at Helene.  Helene smi
led, with a look implying that she did not admit the possibility of anyone seeing
 her without being enchanted. The aunt coughed, swallowed, and said in French tha
t she was very pleased to see Helene, then she turned to Pierre with the same wor
ds of welcome and the same look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation
, Helene turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave to everyo
ne. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little meaning for him, that 
he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just speaking of a collection of snuffbo
xes that had belonged to Pierre's father, Count Bezukhov, and showed them her own
 box. Princess Helene asked to see the portrait of the aunt's husband on the box 
lid.  "That is probably the work of Vinesse," said Pierre, mentioning a celebrate
d miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take the snuffbox while trying to 
hear what was being said at the other table.  He half rose, meaning to go round, 
but the aunt handed him the snuffbox, passing it across Helene's back. Helene sto
oped forward to make room, and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at e
vening parties, wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at fro
nt and back. Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre, was so clos
e to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive the living charm of he
r neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that he need only have bent his head a 
little to have touched them. He was conscious of the warmth of her body, the scen
t of perfume, and the creaking of her corset as she moved. He did not see her mar
ble beauty forming a complete whole with her dress, but all the charm of her body
 only covered by her garments. And having once seen this he could not help being 
aware of it, just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once seen through.  "So 
you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemed to say. "You had
 not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a woman who may belong to anyoneto you 
too," said her glance. And at that moment Pierre felt that Helene not only could,
 but must, be his wife, and that it could not be otherwise.  He knew this at that
 moment as surely as if he had been standing at the altar with her. How and when 
this would be he did not know, he did not even know if it would be a good thing h
e even felt, he knew not why, that it would be a bad thing, but he knew it would 
happen.  Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to see 
her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her every day until 
then, but he could no longer do it. He could not, any more than a man who has bee
n looking at a tuft of steppe grass through the mist and taking it for a tree can
 again take it for a tree after he has once recognized it to be a tuft of grass. 
She was terribly close to him. She already had power over him, and between them t
here was no longer any barrier except the barrier of his own will.  "Well, I will
 leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna's voice, "I see you are all
 right there."  And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anyt
hing reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyone kne
w what had happened to him as he knew it himself.  A little later when he went up
 to the large circle, Anna Pavlovna said to him "I hear you are refitting your Pe
tersburg house?"  This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary
, and Pierre, without knowing why, was having his enormous Petersburg house done 
up.  "That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It is good to hav
e a friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Prince Vasili. "I know somethin
g about that. Don't I? And you are still so young. You need advice. Don't be angr
y with me for exercising an old woman's privilege."  She paused, as women always 
do, expecting something after they have mentioned their age. "If you marry it wil
l be a different thing," she continued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre d
id not look at Helene nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. 
He muttered something and colored.  When he got home he could not sleep for a lon
g time for thinking of what had happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had mere
ly understood that the woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was
 mentioned he had said absentmindedly "Yes, she's good looking," he had understoo
d that this woman might belong to him.  "But she's stupid. I have myself said she
 is stupid," he thought. "There is something nasty, something wrong, in the feeli
ng she excites in me. I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with 
her and she with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that's why he was s
ent away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasili is her father... It's bad....
" he reflected, but while he was thinking this the reflection was still incomplet
e, he caught himself smiling and was conscious that another line of thought had s
prung up, and while thinking of her worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she
 would be his wife, how she would love him become quite different, and how all he
 had thought and heard of her might be false. And he again saw her not as the dau
ghter of Prince Vasili, but visualized her whole body only veiled by its gray dre
ss. "But no! Why did this thought never occur to me before?" and again he told hi
mself that it was impossible, that there would be something unnatural, and as it 
seemed to him dishonorable, in this marriage. He recalled her former words and lo
oks and the words and looks of those who had seen them together. He recalled Anna
 Pavlovna's words and looks when she spoke to him about his house, recalled thous
ands of such hints from Prince Vasili and others, and was seized by terror lest h
e had already, in some way, bound himself to do something that was evidently wron
g and that he ought not to do. But at the very time he was expressing this convic
tion to himself, in another part of his mind her image rose in all its womanly be
auty.      CHAPTER II   In November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of i
nspection in four different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as to 
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole where hi
s regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas Bolkonski in orde
r to arrange a match for him with the daughter of that rich old man. But before l
eaving home and undertaking these new affairs, Prince Vasili had to settle matter
s with Pierre, who, it is true, had latterly spent whole days at home, that is, i
n Prince Vasili's house where he was staying, and had been absurd, excited, and f
oolish in Helene's presence as a lover should be, but had not yet proposed to her
.  "This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Prince Vasili to him
self, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that Pierre who was under such 
obligations to him "But never mind that" was not behaving very well in this matte
r. "Youth, frivolity... well, God be with him," thought he, relishing his own goo
dness of heart, "but it must be brought to a head. The day after tomorrow will be
 Lelya's name day. I will invite two or three people, and if he does not understa
nd what he ought to do then it will be my affairyes, my affair. I am her father."
  Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleepless night when he
 had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that he ought to avoid 
her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision, had not left Prince Vasili's and 
felt with terror that in people's eyes he was every day more and more connected w
ith her, that it was impossible for him to return to his former conception of her
, that he could not break away from her, and that though it would be a terrible t
hing he would have to unite his fate with hers. He might perhaps have been able t
o free himself but that Prince Vasili who had rarely before given receptions now 
hardly let a day go by without having an evening party at which Pierre had to be 
present unless he wished to spoil the general pleasure and disappoint everyone's 
expectation. Prince Vasili, in the rare moments when he was at home, would take P
ierre's hand in passing and draw it downwards, or absentmindedly hold out his wri
nkled, cleanshaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say "Till tomorrow," or, "B
e in to dinner or I shall not see you," or, "I am staying in for your sake," and 
so on. And though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in as he said for Pierre's sake, 
hardly exchanged a couple of words with him, Pierre felt unable to disappoint him
. Every day he said to himself one and the same thing "It is time I understood he
r and made up my mind what she really is. Was I mistaken before, or am I mistaken
 now? No, she is not stupid, she is an excellent girl," he sometimes said to hims
elf "she never makes a mistake, never says anything stupid. She says little, but 
what she does say is always clear and simple, so she is not stupid. She never was
 abashed and is not abashed now, so she cannot be a bad woman!" He had often begu
n to make reflections or think aloud in her company, and she had always answered 
him either by a brief but appropriate remarkshowing that it did not interest hero
r by a silent look and smile which more palpably than anything else showed Pierre
 her superiority. She was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense in compari
son with that smile.  She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile m
eant for him alone, in which there was something more significant than in the gen
eral smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone was waitin
g for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew that sooner or late
r he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terror seized him at the thoug
ht of that dreadful step. A thousand times during that month and a half while he 
felt himself drawn nearer and nearer to that dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himse
lf "What am I doing? I need resolution. Can it be that I have none?"  He wished t
o take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matter he lacked that streng
th of will which he had known in himself and really possessed. Pierre was one of 
those who are only strong when they feel themselves quite innocent, and since tha
t day when he was overpowered by a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuf
fbox at Anna Pavlovna's, an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire para
lyzed his will.  On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own peopleas h
is wife saidmet for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends and relations ha
d been given to understand that the fate of the young girl would be decided that 
evening. The visitors were seated at supper. Princess Kuragina, a portly imposing
 woman who had once been handsome, was sitting at the head of the table. On eithe
r side of her sat the more important guestsan old general and his wife, and Anna 
Pavlovna Scherer. At the other end sat the younger and less important guests, and
 there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Helene, side by side. Pr
ince Vasili was not having any supper he went round the table in a merry mood, si
tting down now by one, now by another, of the guests. To each of them he made som
e careless and agreeable remark except to Pierre and Helene, whose presence he se
emed not to notice. He enlivened the whole party. The wax candles burned brightly
, the silver and crystal gleamed, so did the ladies' toilets and the gold and sil
ver of the men's epaulets servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table, the
 clatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with the animated hum of several 
conversations. At one end of the table, the old chamberlain was heard assuring an
 old baroness that he loved her passionately, at which she laughed at the other c
ould be heard the story of the misfortunes of some Mary Viktorovna or other. At t
he center of the table, Prince Vasili attracted everybody's attention. With a fac
etious smile on his face, he was telling the ladies about last Wednesday's meetin
g of the Imperial Council, at which Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov, the new military 
governor general of Petersburg, had received and read the then famous rescript of
 the Emperor Alexander from the army to Sergey Kuzmich, in which the Emperor said
 that he was receiving from all sides declarations of the people's loyalty, that 
the declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure, and that he was pro
ud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavor to be worthy of it. This
 rescript began with the words "Sergey Kuzmich, From all sides reports reach me,"
 etc.  "Well, and so he never got farther than 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" asked one of th
e ladies.  "Exactly, not a hair's breadth farther," answered Prince Vasili, laugh
ing, "'Sergey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides... Sergey Kuzmich...' P
oor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther! He began the rescript again and again,
 but as soon as he uttered 'Sergey' he sobbed, 'Kuzmich,' tears, and 'From all si
des' was smothered in sobs and he could get no farther. And again his handkerchie
f, and again 'Sergey Kuzmich, From all sides,'... and tears, till at last somebod
y else was asked to read it."  "Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," som
eone repeated laughing.  "Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of t
he table holding up a threatening finger. "He is such a worthy and excellent man,
 our dear Vyazmitinov...."  Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the ta
ble, where the honored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and unde
r the influence of a variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierre and Helene sat s
ilently side by side almost at the bottom of the table, a suppressed smile bright
ening both their faces, a smile that had nothing to do with Sergey Kuzmicha smile
 of bashfulness at their own feelings. But much as all the rest laughed, talked, 
and joked, much as they enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however th
ey avoided looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as they seem
ed of them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that the story abo
ut Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and the food were all a pretense, and that the w
hole attention of that company was directed toPierre and Helene. Prince Vasili mi
micked the sobbing of Sergey Kuzmich and at the same time his eyes glanced toward
 his daughter, and while he laughed the expression on his face clearly said "Yes.
.. it's getting on, it will all be settled today." Anna Pavlovna threatened him o
n behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and in her eyes, which, for an instant, glanc
ed at Pierre, Prince Vasili read a congratulation on his future soninlaw and on h
is daughter's happiness. The old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine t
o the old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh seem
ed to say "Yes, there's nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine, my dea
r, now that the time has come for these young ones to be thus boldly, provocative
ly happy." "And what nonsense all this is that I am saying!" thought a diplomatis
t, glancing at the happy faces of the lovers. "That's happiness!"  Into the insig
nificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting that society had entered the
 simple feeling of the attraction of a healthy and handsome young man and woman f
or one another. And this human feeling dominated everything else and soared above
 all their affected chatter. Jests fell flat, news was not interesting, and the a
nimation was evidently forced. Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting a
t table seemed to feel this, and they forgot their duties as they looked at the b
eautiful Helene with her radiant face and at the red, broad, and happy though une
asy face of Pierre. It seemed as if the very light of the candles was focused on 
those two happy faces alone.  Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and t
his both pleased and embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some
 occupation. He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and t
hen detached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shot unexpectedly th
rough his mind.  "So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happene
d? How quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone, bu
t because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are all expecting it, 
they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, I cannot, disappoint them. Bu
t how will it be? I do not know, but it will certainly happen!" thought Pierre, g
lancing at those dazzling shoulders close to his eyes.  Or he would suddenly feel
 ashamed of he knew not what. He felt it awkward to attract everyone's attention 
and to be considered a lucky man and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a s
ort of Paris possessed of a Helen. "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" he
 consoled himself. "And besides, what have I done to bring it about? How did it b
egin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Then there was nothing. So why s
hould I not stay at his house? Then I played cards with her and picked up her ret
icule and drove out with her. How did it begin, when did it all come about?" And 
here he was sitting by her side as her betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her ne
arness, her breathing, her movements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to 
him that it was not she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was why 
they all looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration he would expa
nd his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune. Suddenly he heard 
a familiar voice repeating something to him a second time. But Pierre was so abso
rbed that he did not understand what was said.  "I am asking you when you last he
ard from Bolkonski," repeated Prince Vasili a third time. "How absentminded you a
re, my dear fellow."  Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was 
smiling at him and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thought Pierre
. "What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentle childlike smile,
 and Helene smiled too.  "When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repea
ted Prince Vasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a disput
e.  "How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.  "Yes, from Olmu
tz," he answered, with a sigh.  After supper Pierre with his partner followed the
 others into the drawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking 
leave of Helene. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from an important occupati
on, came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away, refusing to let her se
e them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournful silence as he left the drawing r
oom. He pictured the vanity of his diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's 
happiness. The old general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was. "
Oh, the old fool," he thought. "That Princess Helene will be beautiful still when
 she's fifty."  "I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the 
old princess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd have stayed lon
ger."  The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of her daugh
ter's happiness.  While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a 
long time alone with Helene in the little drawing room where they were sitting. H
e had often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her, but had n
ever spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable, but he could not 
make up his mind to take the final step. He felt ashamed he felt that he was occu
pying someone else's place here beside Helene. "This happiness is not for you," s
ome inner voice whispered to him. "This happiness is for those who have not in th
em what there is in you."  But, as he had to say something, he began by asking he
r whether she was satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manne
r that this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.  S
ome of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in the large dra
wing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languid footsteps. Pierre rose an
d said it was getting late. Prince Vasili gave him a look of stern inquiry, as th
ough what Pierre had just said was so strange that one could not take it in. But 
then the expression of severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, mad
e him sit down, and smiled affectionately.  "Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning inst
antly to his daughter and addressing her with the careless tone of habitual tende
rness natural to parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which 
Prince Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.  And he again turned 
to Pierre.  "Sergey KuzmichFrom all sides" he said, unbuttoning the top button of
 his waistcoat.  Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the 
story about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and Prince Va
sili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered something and went away. It 
seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted. The sight of the discompo
sure of that old man of the world touched Pierre he looked at Helene and she too 
seemed disconcerted, and her look seemed to say "Well, it is your own fault."  "T
he step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and he again began
 speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich, asking what the point 
of the story was as he had not heard it properly. Helene answered with a smile th
at she too had missed it.  When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the p
rincess, his wife, was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.  "O
f course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."  "Marriages ar
e made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.  Prince Vasili passed by, seeming no
t to hear the ladies, and sat down on a sofa in a far corner of the room. He clos
ed his eyes and seemed to be dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused him
self.  "Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."  The princ
ess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified and indifferent air, and g
lanced into the little drawing room. Pierre and Helene still sat talking just as 
before.  "Still the same," she said to her husband.  Prince Vasili frowned, twist
ing his mouth, his cheeks quivered and his face assumed the coarse, unpleasant ex
pression peculiar to him. Shaking himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with
 resolute steps went past the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick ste
ps he went joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierr
e rose in alarm on seeing it.  "Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told
 me everything!" He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter."
My dear boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." His voice trembled. "I loved your fat
her... and she will make you a good wife... God bless you!..."  He embraced his d
aughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his malodorous mouth. Tears a
ctually moistened his cheeks.  "Princess, come here!" he shouted.  The old prince
ss came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using her handkerchief too. Pierre
 was kissed, and he kissed the beautiful Helene's hand several times. After a whi
le they were left alone again.  "All this had to be and could not be otherwise," 
thought Pierre, "so it is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good be
cause it's definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held the 
hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful bosom as it rose and f
ell.  "Helene!" he said aloud and paused.  "Something special is always said in s
uch cases," he thought, but could not remember what it was that people say. He lo
oked at her face. She drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.  "Oh, take those off.
.. those..." she said, pointing to his spectacles.  Pierre took them off, and his
 eyes, besides the strange look eyes have from which spectacles have just been re
moved, had also a frightened and inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her h
and and kiss it, but with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she interc
epted his lips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,
 unpleasantly excited expression.  "It is too late now, it's done besides I love 
her," thought Pierre.  "Je vous aime!" * he said, remembering what has to be said
 at such moments but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.  
     * "I love you."   Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezuk
hov's large, newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people sai
d, of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.      CHAPTER I
II   Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili in Novemb
er, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him a visit. "I am start
ing on a journey of inspection, and of course I shall think nothing of an extra s
eventy miles to come and see you at the same time, my honored benefactor," wrote 
Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole is accompanying me on his way to the army, so I ho
pe you will allow him personally to express the deep respect that, emulating his 
father, he feels for you."  "It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary ou
t, suitors are coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the littl
e princess on hearing the news.  Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.  A fo
rtnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one evening in advance of 
him, and he and his son arrived next day.  Old Bolkonski had always had a poor op
inion of Prince Vasili's character, but more so recently, since in the new reigns
 of Paul and Alexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. And n
ow, from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess, he s
aw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinion changed into a feeling of 
contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentioned him. On the day of Prince
 Vasili's arrival, Prince Bolkonski was particularly discontented and out of temp
er. Whether he was in a bad temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether h
is being in a bad temper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he 
was in a bad temper, and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architect 
not to go to the prince with his report.  "Do you hear how he's walking?" said Ti
khon, drawing the architect's attention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "
Stepping flat on his heelswe know what that means...."  However, at nine o'clock 
the prince, in his velvet coat with a sable collar and cap, went out for his usua
l walk. It had snowed the day before and the path to the hothouse, along which th
e prince was in the habit of walking, had been swept the marks of the broom were 
still visible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of the soft 
snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince went through the conse
rvatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildings, frowning and silent.  "Can 
a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resembling his master in 
manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to the house.  "The snow is deep
. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."  The prince bowed his head and went 
up to the porch. "God be thanked," thought the overseer, "the storm has blown ove
r!"  "It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard, your 
honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."  The prince turned round t
o the overseer and fixed his eyes on him, frowning.  "What? A minister? What mini
ster? Who gave orders?" he said in his shrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swep
t for the princess my daughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no minister
s!"  "Your honor, I thought..."  "You thought!" shouted the prince, his words com
ing more and more rapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards
!... I'll teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would have h
it Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided the blow. "Th
ought... Blackguards..." shouted the prince rapidly.  But although Alpatych, frig
htened at his own temerity in avoiding the stroke, came up to the prince, bowing 
his bald head resignedly before him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince,
 though he continued to shout "Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!" 
did not lift his stick again but hurried into the house.  Before dinner, Princess
 Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew that the prince was in a bad humor, st
ood awaiting him Mademoiselle Bourienne with a radiant face that said "I know not
hing, I am the same as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downc
ast eyes. What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions she o
ught to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thought "If I seem
 not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize with him if I seem sad and 
out of spirits myself, he will say as he has done before that I'm in the dumps." 
 The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.  "Fool... or du
mmy!" he muttered.  "And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," 
he thoughtreferring to the little princess who was not in the dining room.  "Wher
e is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"  "She is not very well," answered Mademoi
selle Bourienne with a bright smile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in he
r state."  "Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.  His plate seemed to him 
not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he flung it away. Tikhon caught it and ha
nded it to a footman. The little princess was not unwell, but had such an overpow
ering fear of the prince that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not
 to appear.  "I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne "Heav
en knows what a fright might do."  In general at Bald Hills the little princess l
ived in constant fear, and with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she 
did not realize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The prince rec
iprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt for her. When th
e little princess had grown accustomed to life at Bald Hills, she took a special 
fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent whole days with her, asked her to sleep in
 her room, and often talked with her about the old prince and criticized him.  "S
o we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselle Bourienne, unfoldin
g her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "His Excellency Prince Vasili Kuragin a
nd his son, I understand?" she said inquiringly.  "Hm!his excellency is a puppy..
.. I got him his appointment in the service," said the prince disdainfully. "Why 
his son is coming I don't understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mar
y know. I don't want him." He looked at his blushing daughter. "Are you unwell to
day? Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him this morning?
"  "No, mon pere."  Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her
 choice of a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about the conservat
ories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, and after the soup the pri
nce became more genial.  After dinner, he went to see his daughterinlaw. The litt
le princess was sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She gr
ew pale on seeing her fatherinlaw.  She was much altered. She was now plain rathe
r than pretty. Her cheeks had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down
.  "Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince's question
 as to how she felt.  "Do you want anything?"  "No, merci, mon pere."  "Well, all
 right, all right."  He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych
 stood with bowed head.  "Has the snow been shoveled back?"  "Yes, your excellenc
y. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only my stupidity."  "All right, all ri
ght," interrupted the prince, and laughing his unnatural way, he stretched out hi
s hand for Alpatych to kiss, and then proceeded to his study.  Prince Vasili arri
ved that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmen and footmen, who, with lou
d shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of the lodges over the road purposely lad
en with snow.  Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.  An
atole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before a table on a co
rner of which he smilingly and absentmindedly fixed his large and handsome eyes. 
He regarded his whole life as a continual round of amusement which someone for so
me reason had to provide for him. And he looked on this visit to a churlish old m
an and a rich and ugly heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn 
out very well and amusingly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much mon
ey? That never does any harm," thought Anatole.  He shaved and scented himself wi
th the care and elegance which had become habitual to him and, his handsome head 
held high, entered his father's room with the goodhumored and victorious air natu
ral to him. Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked roun
d with much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latter entered, as 
if to say "Yes, that's how I want you to look."  "I say, Father, joking apart, is
 she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as if continuing a conversation the subject of
 which had often been mentioned during the journey.  "Enough! What nonsense! Abov
e all, try to be respectful and cautious with the old prince."  "If he starts a r
ow I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bear those old men! Eh?"  "Rememb
er, for you everything depends on this."  In the meantime, not only was it known 
in the maidservants' rooms that the minister and his son had arrived, but the app
earance of both had been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in h
er room, vainly trying to master her agitation.  "Why did they write, why did Lis
e tell me about it? It can never happen!" she said, looking at herself in the gla
ss. "How shall I enter the drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself
 with him." The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror. The lit
tle princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha, the lady
's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's son was, with his ro
sy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficulty the father had dragged his 
legs upstairs while the son had followed him like an eagle, three steps at a time
. Having received this information, the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienn
e, whose chattering voices had reached her from the corridor, went into Princess 
Mary's room.  "You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling 
in, and sinking heavily into an armchair.  She was no longer in the loose gown sh
e generally wore in the morning, but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was
 carefully done and her face was animated, which, however, did not conceal its su
nken and faded outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was 
still more noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touch had
 been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered her fresh and prett
y face yet more attractive.  "What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear prin
cess?" she began. "They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing ro
om and we shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!" 
 The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrily began t
o devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be dressed. Princess Ma
ry's selfesteem was wounded by the fact that the arrival of a suitor agitated her
, and still more so by both her companions' not having the least conception that 
it could be otherwise. To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for the
m would be to betray her agitation, while to decline their offers to dress her wo
uld prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyes grew dim
, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractive martyrlike expre
ssion it so often wore, as she submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Li
se. Both these women quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty. She was so pl
ain that neither of them could think of her as a rival, so they began dressing he
r with perfect sincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that 
dress can make a face pretty.  "No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," sa
id Lise, looking sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a ma
roon dress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life may be 
at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"  It was not the dress, b
ut the face and whole figure of Princess Mary that was not pretty, but neither Ma
demoiselle Bourienne nor the little princess felt this they still thought that if
 a blue ribbon were placed in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf ar
ranged lower on the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot 
that the frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and that however th
ey might change the setting and adornment of that face, it would still remain pit
eous and plain. After two or three changes to which Princess Mary meekly submitte
d, just as her hair had been arranged on the top of her head a style that quite a
ltered and spoiled her looks and she had put on a maroon dress with a paleblue sc
arf, the little princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of the dres
s with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at her with her head 
bent first on one side and then on the other.  "No, it will not do," she said dec
idedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary, really this dress does not suit you. I pre
fer you in your little gray everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie,
" she said to the maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, Madem
oiselle Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretaste o
f artistic pleasure.  But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary re
mained sitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in the m
irror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burst into sobs.  
"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one more little effort.
"  The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to Princess Mary.
  "Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.  The t
hree voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who was laughing at som
ething, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping of birds.  "No, leave me alon
e," said Princess Mary.  Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirpin
g of the birds was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thought
ful eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly at them,
 and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist.  "At least, change 
your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't I tell you," she went on, turni
ng reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne, "Mary's is a face which such a coiffu
re does not suit in the least. Not in the least! Please change it."  "Leave me al
one, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me," answered a voice str
uggling with tears.  Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to
 themselves that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
 but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression they both knew, 
an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in Princess Mary did not fright
en them she never inspired fear in anyone, but they knew that when it appeared on
 her face, she became mute and was not to be shaken in her determination.  "You w
ill change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave no answer, she le
ft the room.  Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's reques
t, she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in her glass. Lett
ing her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes and pondered. A husband,
 a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractive being rose in her imagination,
 and carried her into a totally different happy world of his own. She fancied a c
hild, her ownsuch as she had seen the day before in the arms of her nurse's daugh
terat her own breast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and the 
child. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought.  "Please come to t
ea. The prince will be out in a moment," came the maid's voice at the door.  She 
roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, and before going
 down she went into the room where the icons hung and, her eyes fixed on the dark
 face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by a lamp, she stood before it with fold
ed hands for a few moments. A painful doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of lov
e, of earthly love for a man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Ma
ry dreamed of happiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden lo
nging was for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling from others a
nd even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O God," she said, "how am I to stifl
e in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am I to renounce forever these 
vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy will?" And scarcely had she put tha
t question than God gave her the answer in her own heart. "Desire nothing for thy
self, seek nothing, be not anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must
 remain hidden from thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If 
it be God's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfill His
 will." With this consoling thought but yet with a hope for the fulfillment of he
r forbidden earthly longing Princess Mary sighed, and having crossed herself went
 down, thinking neither of her gown and coiffure nor of how she would go in nor o
f what she would say. What could all that matter in comparison with the will of G
od, without Whose care not a hair of man's head can fall?      CHAPTER IV   When 
Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already in the drawing ro
om, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne. When she entered w
ith her heavy step, treading on her heels, the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourien
ne rose and the little princess, indicating her to the gentlemen, said "Voila Mar
ie!" Princess Mary saw them all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's f
ace, serious for an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, a
nd the little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced on the vi
sitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and pretty face, and 
her unusually animated look which was fixed on him, but him she could not see, sh
e only saw something large, brilliant, and handsome moving toward her as she ente
red the room. Prince Vasili approached first, and she kissed the bold forehead th
at bent over her hand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, 
she remembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still could not s
ee him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and she touched with her li
ps a white forehead, over which was beautiful lightbrown hair smelling of pomade.
 When she looked up at him she was struck by his beauty. Anatole stood with his r
ight thumb under a button of his uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn i
n, slightly swinging one foot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beam
ing face at the princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about her at
 all. Anatole was not quickwitted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, but he 
had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure and imperturbable selfpos
session. If a man lacking in selfconfidence remains dumb on a first introduction 
and betrays a consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to 
find something to say, the effect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, a
nd smilingly examined the princess' hair. It was evident that he could be silent 
in this way for a very long time. "If anyone finds this silence inconvenient, let
 him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to say. Besides this, in his behavior 
to women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in them curiosity, awe,
 and even lovea supercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if h
e said to them "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you? You'd 
be only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think this when he met wo
meneven probably he did not, for in general he thought very littlebut his looks a
nd manner gave that impression. The princess felt this, and as if wishing to show
 him that she did not even dare expect to interest him, she turned to his father.
 The conversation was general and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and l
ittle downy lip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with that
 playful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consisting in the ass
umption that between the person they so address and themselves there are some sem
iprivate, longestablished jokes and amusing reminiscences, though no such reminis
cences really existjust as none existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopt
ed her tone and the little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into
 these amusing recollections of things that had never occurred. Mademoiselle Bour
ienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself pleasantly made to sha
re in these merry reminiscences.  "Here at least we shall have the benefit of you
r company all to ourselves, dear prince," said the little princess of course, in 
French to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where you always 
ran away you remember cette chere Annette!"       * Anna Pavlovna.   "Ah, but you
 won't talk politics to me like Annette!"  "And our little tea table?"  "Oh, yes!
"  "Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess asked Anatole. "A
h, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brother Hippolyte told me a
bout your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger at him, "I have even heard of 
your doings in Paris!"  "And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, tur
ning to his son and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run awa
y and he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself was pi
ning for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, she is a pearl a
mong women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.  When Paris was mentio
ned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the opportunity of joining in the
 general current of recollections.  She took the liberty of inquiring whether it 
was long since Anatole had left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole ans
wered the Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to he
r about her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatole came to
 the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either. "Not at all bad!" 
he thought, examining her, "not at all bad, that little companion! I hope she wil
l bring her along with her when we're married, la petite est gentille." *       *
 The little one is charming.   The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, fro
wning and considering what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him
. "What are Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallow b
raggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled to himself. What 
angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived in his mind an unsettle
d question he always tried to stifle, one about which he always deceived himself.
 The question was whether he could ever bring himself to part from his daughter a
nd give her to a husband. The prince never directly asked himself that question, 
knowing beforehand that he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed no
t only with his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life without Prin
cess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to him. "And why sho
uld she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain. There's Lise, married to 
Andrewa better husband one would think could hardly be found nowadaysbut is she c
ontented with her lot? And who would marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! The
y'll take her for her connections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried
, and even the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and y
et the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate answer. Prince Va
sili had brought his son with the evident intention of proposing, and today or to
morrow he would probably ask for an answer. His birth and position in society wer
e not bad. "Well, I've nothing against it," the prince said to himself, "but he m
ust be worthy of her. And that is what we shall see."  "That is what we shall see
! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.  He entered the drawing room with h
is usual alert step, glancing rapidly round the company. He noticed the change in
 the little princess' dress, Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unb
ecoming coiffure, Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneline
ss of his daughter amid the general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!" h
e thought, looking irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he ignores her!"  He 
went straight up to Prince Vasili.  "Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see 
you!"  "Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid, s
elfconfident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son please love and befriend him.
"  Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.  "Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he
 said. "Well, come and kiss me," and he offered his cheek.  Anatole kissed the ol
d man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfect composure, waiting for a disp
lay of the eccentricities his father had told him to expect.  Prince Bolkonski sa
t down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa and, drawing up an armchair f
or Prince Vasili, pointed to it and began questioning him about political affairs
 and news. He seemed to listen attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept g
lancing at Princess Mary.  "And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he sai
d, repeating Prince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to his 
daughter.  "Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he. "F
ine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for the visitors, and 
before the visitors I tell you that in future you are never to dare to change you
r way of dress without my consent."  "It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the 
little princess, with a blush.  "You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonsk
i, bowing to his daughterinlaw, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's p
lain enough as it is."  And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his da
ughter, who was reduced to tears.  "On the contrary, that coiffure suits the prin
cess very well," said Prince Vasili.  "Now you, young prince, what's your name?" 
said Prince Bolkonski, turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquai
nted."  "Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile beside t
he old prince.  "Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taugh
t to read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me, my dear 
boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man, scrutinizing Anatol
e closely and intently.  "No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole,
 hardly able to restrain his laughter.  "Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy
, you wish to serve the Tsar and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow m
ust serve. Well, are you off to the front?"  "No, Prince, our regiment has gone t
o the front, but I am attached... what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatol
e, turning to his father with a laugh.  "A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I
 attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still l
ouder. Suddenly Prince Bolkonski frowned.  "You may go," he said to Anatole.  Ana
tole returned smiling to the ladies.  "And so you've had him educated abroad, Pri
nce Vasili, haven't you?" said the old prince to Prince Vasili.  "I have done my 
best for him, and I can assure you the education there is much better than ours."
  "Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad's a fine
 fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took Prince Vasili's arm and 
led him to his study. As soon as they were alone together, Prince Vasili announce
d his hopes and wishes to the old prince.  "Well, do you think I shall prevent he
r, that I can't part from her?" said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm r
eady for it tomorrow! Only let me tell you, I want to know my soninlaw better. Yo
u know my principleseverything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in your presen
ce if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'll see." The old pri
nce snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!" he screamed in the same pi
ercing tone as when parting from his son.  "I will tell you frankly," said Prince
 Vasili in the tone of a crafty man convinced of the futility of being cunning wi
th so keensighted companion. "You know, you see right through people. Anatole is 
no genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad an excellent son or kinsman."  "A
ll right, all right, we'll see!"  As always happens when women lead lonely lives 
for any length of time without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the thre
e women of Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real ti
ll then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediately increased 
tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed in darkness, was sudden
ly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.  Princess Mary grew quite un
conscious of her face and coiffure. The handsome open face of the man who might p
erhaps be her husband absorbed all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, d
etermined, manly, and magnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dream
s of a future family life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them awa
y and tried to conceal them.  "But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princ
ess. "I try to be reserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him
 already, but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I do n
ot like him."  And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to he
r new guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.  Mademoiselle Bou
rienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole's arrival, thought in another 
way. Of course, she, a handsome young woman without any definite position, withou
t relations or even a country, did not intend to devote her life to serving Princ
e Bolkonski, to reading aloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. Mademo
iselle Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able to apprecia
te at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed, ungainly Russian prin
cesses, would fall in love with her and carry her off and here at last was a Russ
ian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew a story, heard from her aunt but finished
 in her own way, which she liked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl
 who had been seduced, and to whom her poor mother sa pauvre mere appeared, and r
eproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle Bourienne
 was often touched to tears as in imagination she told this story to him, her sed
ucer. And now he, a real Russian prince, had appeared. He would carry her away an
d then sa pauvre mere would appear and he would marry her. So her future shaped i
tself in Mademoiselle Bourienne's head at the very time she was talking to Anatol
e about Paris. It was not calculation that guided her she did not even for a mome
nt consider what she should do, but all this had long been familiar to her, and n
ow that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself around him and she wished and
 tried to please him as much as possible.  The little princess, like an old war h
orse that hears the trumpet, unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, pr
epared for the familiar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or any st
ruggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.  Although in female society Anato
le usually assumed the role of a man tired of being run after by women, his vanit
y was flattered by the spectacle of his power over these three women. Besides tha
t, he was beginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bourienne
 that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with great suddenness
 and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.  After tea, the compan
y went into the sitting room and Princess Mary was asked to play on the clavichor
d. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits, came and leaned on his elbows, facing h
er and beside Mademoiselle Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfull
y joyous emotion. Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic worl
d and the look she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole's
 expression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her but to the mo
vements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he was then touching with 
his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at Princess
 Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy and hope that was a
lso new to the princess.  "How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I
 am now, and how happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? C
an it be possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but still feelin
g his eyes gazing at her.  In the evening, after supper, when all were about to r
etire, Anatole kissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the co
urage, but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to her shor
tsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissed Mademoiselle Bour
ienne's hand. This was not etiquette, but then he did everything so simply and wi
th such assurance! Mademoiselle Bourienne flushed, and gave the princess a fright
ened look.  "What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie" M
ademoiselle Bourienne "thinks I could be jealous of her, and not value her pure a
ffection and devotion to me?" She went up to her and kissed her warmly. Anatole w
ent up to kiss the little princess' hand.  "No! No! No! When your father writes t
o tell me that you are behaving well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till th
en!" she said. And smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.      CHA
PTER V   They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as he go
t into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.  "Is he really to be my husban
d, this stranger who is so kindyes, kind, that is the chief thing," thought Princ
ess Mary and fear, which she had seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to
 look round, it seemed to her that someone was there standing behind the screen i
n the dark corner. And this someone was hethe deviland he was also this man with 
the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.  She rang for her maid and aske
d her to sleep in her room.  Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conser
vatory for a long time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at som
eone, now working herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mere
 rebuking her for her fall.  The little princess grumbled to her maid that her be
d was badly made. She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every posi
tion was awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more than ev
er because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the time when she was n
ot like that and when everything was light and gay. She sat in an armchair in her
 dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepy and disheveled, beat and turned t
he heavy feather bed for the third time, muttering to herself.  "I told you it wa
s all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated. "I should be glad enough to
 fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and her voice quivered like that of a child 
about to cry.  The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard hi
m pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he had been in
sulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointed because it concerned
 not himself but another, his daughter, whom he loved more than himself. He kept 
telling himself that he would consider the whole matter and decide what was right
 and how he should act, but instead of that he only excited himself more and more
.  "The first man that turns upshe forgets her father and everything else, runs u
pstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlike herself! Glad to thr
ow her father over! And she knew I should notice it. Fr... fr... fr! And don't I 
see that that idiot had eyes only for BourienneI shall have to get rid of her. An
d how is it she has not pride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself s
he might at least have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thi
nks nothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... but I'll 
let her see...."  The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making
 a mistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne, Princess 
Mary's selfesteem would be wounded and his point not to be parted from her would 
be gained, so pacifying himself with this thought, he called Tikhon and began to 
undress.  "What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting th
e nightshirt over his driedup old body and grayhaired chest. "I never invited the
m. They came to disturb my lifeand there is not much of it left."  "Devil take 'e
m!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by the shirt.  Tikhon knew his 
master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, and therefore met with unaltered look
s the angrily inquisitive expression of the face that emerged from the shirt.  "G
one to bed?" asked the prince.  Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew 
the direction of his master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to 
Prince Vasili and his son.  "They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your
 excellency."  "No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his
 feet into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, he we
nt to the couch on which he slept.  Though no words had passed between Anatole an
d Mademoiselle Bourienne, they quite understood one another as to the first part 
of their romance, up to the appearance of the pauvre mere they understood that th
ey had much to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking an oppo
rtunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Mary went to her f
ather's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and Anatole met in the con
servatory.  Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation.
 It seemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would be decided
 that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She read this in Ti
khon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, who made her a low bow when she
 met him in the corridor carrying hot water.  The old prince was very affectionat
e and careful in his treatment of his daughter that morning. Princess Mary well k
new this painstaking expression of her father's. His face wore that expression wh
en his dry hands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum in arithme
tic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her, repeating in a low v
oice the same words several times over.  He came to the point at once, treating h
er ceremoniously.  "I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said wit
h an unnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has not come 
and brought his pupil with him" for some reason Prince Bolkonski referred to Anat
ole as a "pupil" "for the sake of my beautiful eyes. Last night a proposition was
 made me on your account and, as you know my principles, I refer it to you."  "Ho
w am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing pale and then blu
shing.  "How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds you t
o his taste as a daughterinlaw and makes a proposal to you on his pupil's behalf.
 That's how it's to be understood! 'How understand it'!... And I ask you!"  "I do
 not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.  "I? I? What of me? Le
ave me out of the question. I'm not going to get married. What about you? That's 
what I want to know."  The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with 
disapproval, but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would b
e decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gaze under whic
h she felt that she could not think, but would only be able to submit from habit,
 and she said "I wish only to do your will, but if I had to express my own desire
..." She had no time to finish. The old prince interrupted her.  "That's admirabl
e!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry and take Mademoiselle Bourienne
 into the bargain. She'll be the wife, while you..."  The prince stopped. He saw 
the effect these words had produced on his daughter. She lowered her head and was
 ready to burst into tears.  "Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Rem
ember this, Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right to c
hoose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happiness depends on yo
ur decision. Never mind me!"  "But I do not know, Father!"  "There's no need to t
alk! He receives his orders and will marry you or anybody but you are free to cho
ose.... Go to your room, think it over, and come back in an hour and tell me in h
is presence yes or no. I know you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but 
you had better think it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shou
ted when the princess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the stud
y.  Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had said about 
Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, but still it was t
errible, and she could not help thinking of it. She was going straight on through
 the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearing anything, when suddenly the wellkno
wn whispering of Mademoiselle Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two
 steps away saw Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her
. With a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at Princess Ma
ry, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of Mademoiselle Bourienne who
 had not yet seen her.  "Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed t
o say. Princess Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At l
ast Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed to Princess 
Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh at this strange inci
dent, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door that led to his own apart
ments.  An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince he add
ed that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to her Princess Mary was s
itting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping Mademoiselle Bourienne in her
 arms and gently stroking her hair. The princess' beautiful eyes with all their f
ormer calm radiance were looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle B
ourienne's pretty face.  "No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said
 Mademoiselle Bourienne.  "Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "
and I will try to do all I can for your happiness."  "But you despise me. You who
 are so pure can never understand being so carried away by passion. Oh, only my p
oor mother..."  "I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "
Calm yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.  Prince 
Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in his hand, was s
itting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face, as if stirred to his heart
's core and himself regretting and laughing at his own sensibility, when Princess
 Mary entered. He hurriedly took a pinch of snuff.  "Ah, my dear, my dear!" he be
gan, rising and taking her by both hands. Then, sighing, he added "My son's fate 
is in your hands. Decide, my dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved a
s a daughter!"  He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.  "Fr... fr..." 
snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making a proposition to you in his pupil
'sI mean, his son'sname. Do you wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? 
Reply yes or no," he shouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opi
nion also. Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turning
 to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"  "My desire is 
never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life from yours. I don't wish to
 marry," she answered positively, glancing at Prince Vasili and at her father wit
h her beautiful eyes.  "Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince B
olkonski, frowning and taking his daughter's hand he did not kiss her, but only b
ending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand so that she win
ced and uttered a cry.  Prince Vasili rose.  "My dear, I must tell you that this 
is a moment I shall never, never forget. But, my dear, will you not give us a lit
tle hope of touching this heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The futur
e is so long. Say 'perhaps.'"  "Prince, what I have said is all there is in my he
art. I thank you for the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."  "Well, so
 that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seen you. Very glad! Go 
back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the old prince. "Very, very glad to have 
seen you," repeated he, embracing Prince Vasili.  "My vocation is a different one
," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation is to be happy with another kind of happin
ess, the happiness of love and selfsacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrang
e poor Amelie's happiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately rep
ents. I will do all I can to arrange the match between them. If he is not rich I 
will give her the means I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be so happy when
 she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone, helpless! And, oh God
, how passionately she must love him if she could so far forget herself! Perhaps 
I might have done the same!..." thought Princess Mary.      CHAPTER VI   It was l
ong since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinter was the count at l
ast handed a letter addressed in his son's handwriting. On receiving it, he ran o
n tiptoe to his study in alarm and haste, trying to escape notice, closed the doo
r, and began to read the letter.  Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything th
at passed in the house, on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into 
the room and found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the sam
e time.  Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was still livin
g with the Rostovs.  "My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, p
repared to sympathize in any way.  The count sobbed yet more.  "Nikolenka... a le
tter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy... the countess... promoted to 
be an officer... thank God... How tell the little countess!"  Anna Mikhaylovna sa
t down beside him, with her own handkerchief wiped the tears from his eyes and fr
om the letter, then having dried her own eyes she comforted the count, and decide
d that at dinner and till teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, 
with God's help, would inform her.  At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole t
ime about the war news and about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had 
been received from him, though she knew that already, and remarked that they migh
t very likely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hints b
egan to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the count and at An
na Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned the conversation to insignificant
 matters. Natasha, who, of the whole family, was the most gifted with a capacity 
to feel any shades of intonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from 
the beginning of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her 
father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with her brother, and th
at Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold as she was, Natasha, who knew
 how sensitive her mother was to anything relating to Nikolenka, did not venture 
to ask any questions at dinner, but she was too excited to eat anything and kept 
wriggling about on her chair regardless of her governess' remarks. After dinner, 
she rushed head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on
 her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room.  "Auntie, darling, do 
tell me what it is!"  "Nothing, my dear."  "No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won'
t give upI know you know something."  Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.  "You are 
a little slyboots," she said.  "A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaim
ed Natasha, reading confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.  "But for God's sake
, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma."  "I will, I will, only tell
 me! You won't? Then I will go and tell at once."  Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few wor
ds, told her the contents of the letter, on condition that she should tell no one
.  "No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won't tell 
anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.  "Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," s
he announced in gleeful triumph.  "Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turni
ng white.  Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound produce
d on Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.  She rushed t
o Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.  "A little wound, but he has been made an 
officer he is well now, he wrote himself," said she through her tears.  "There no
w! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya, pacing the room w
ith large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, very glad indeed, that my brothe
r has distinguished himself so. You are all blubberers and understand nothing."  
Natasha smiled through her tears.  "You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.  "
No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer."  "Thank God!
" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceived you. Let us go to Mamma
."  Petya paced the room in silence for a time.  "If I'd been in Nikolenka's plac
e I would have killed even more of those Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes 
they are! I'd have killed so many that there'd have been a heap of them."  "Hold 
your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"  "I'm not a goose, but they are who cr
y about trifles," said Petya.  "Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, aft
er a moment's silence.  Sonya smiled.  "Do I remember Nicholas?"  "No, Sonya, but
 do you remember so that you remember him perfectly, remember everything?" said N
atasha, with an expressive gesture, evidently wishing to give her words a very de
finite meaning. "I remember Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I
 don't remember Boris. I don't remember him a bit."  "What! You don't remember Bo
ris?" asked Sonya in surprise.  "It's not that I don't rememberI know what he is 
like, but not as I remember Nikolenka. HimI just shut my eyes and remember, but B
oris... No!" She shut her eyes. "No! there's nothing at all."  "Oh, Natasha!" sai
d Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at her friend as if she did not consi
der her worthy to hear what she meant to say and as if she were saying it to some
one else, with whom joking was out of the question, "I am in love with your broth
er once for all and, whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to lo
ve him as long as I live."  Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitiv
e eyes, and said nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there 
was such love as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anything lik
e it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.  "Shall you write to h
im?" she asked.  Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nichola
s, and whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already an offi
cer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herself and, as it mig
ht seem, of the obligations to her he had taken on himself?  "I don't know. I thi
nk if he writes, I will write too," she said, blushing.  "And you won't feel asha
med to write to him?"  Sonya smiled.  "No."  "And I should be ashamed to write to
 Boris. I'm not going to."  "Why should you be ashamed?"  "Well, I don't know. It
's awkward and would make me ashamed."  "And I know why she'd be ashamed," said P
etya, offended by Natasha's previous remark. "It's because she was in love with t
hat fat one in spectacles" that was how Petya described his namesake, the new Cou
nt Bezukhov "and now she's in love with that singer" he meant Natasha's Italian s
inging master, "that's why she's ashamed!"  "Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natash
a.  "Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nineyearold Petya, with the air o
f an old brigadier.  The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints a
t dinner. On retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on 
a miniature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tears kept co
ming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came on tiptoe to the coun
tess' door and paused.  "Don't come in," she said to the old count who was follow
ing her. "Come later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.  The count p
ut his ear to the keyhole and listened.  At first he heard the sound of indiffere
nt voices, then Anna Mikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then
 silence, then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps. An
na Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression of a surgeon w
ho has just performed a difficult operation and admits the public to appreciate h
is skill.  "It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to the coun
tess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait and in the other
 the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.  When she saw the count, 
she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his bald head, over which she again l
ooked at the letter and the portrait, and in order to press them again to her lip
s, she slightly pushed away the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now en
tered the room, and the reading of the letter began. After a brief description of
 the campaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and his promotion, 
Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's hands asking for their ble
ssing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya. Besides that, he sent greetin
gs to Monsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss, and his old nurse, and asked them to kis
s for him "dear Sonya, whom he loved and thought of just the same as ever." When 
she heard this Sonya blushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear
 the looks turned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it at f
ull speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and smiling, plu
mped down on the floor. The countess was crying.  "Why are you crying, Mamma?" as
ked Vera. "From all he says one should be glad and not cry."  This was quite true
, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked at her reproachfully. "And who 
is it she takes after?" thought the countess.  Nicholas' letter was read over hun
dreds of times, and those who were considered worthy to hear it had to come to th
e countess, for she did not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nur
ses, and Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter ea
ch time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it fresh proofs of Nikole
nka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, how joyful it seemed, that her son
, the scarcely perceptible motion of whose tiny limbs she had felt twenty years a
go within her, that son about whom she used to have quarrels with the too indulge
nt count, that son who had first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that th
is son should now be away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly wa
rrior doing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance. The uni
versal experience of ages, showing that children do grow imperceptibly from the c
radle to manhood, did not exist for the countess. Her son's growth toward manhood
, at each of its stages, had seemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never
 existed the millions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty year
s before, it seemed impossible that the little creature who lived somewhere under
 her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin to speak, so now she could 
not believe that that little creature could be this strong, brave man, this model
 son and officer that, judging by this letter, he now was.  "What a style! How ch
armingly he describes!" said she, reading the descriptive part of the letter. "An
d what a soul! Not a word about himself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or oth
er, though he himself, I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing ab
out his sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has remembered e
verybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only so highI always s
aid...."  For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts of lett
ers to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out, while under t
he supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the count, money and all thi
ngs necessary for the uniform and equipment of the newly commissioned officer wer
e collected. Anna Mikhaylovna, practical woman that she was, had even managed by 
favor with army authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for her
self and her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand Duke 
Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostovs supposed that The Ru
ssian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address, and that if a letter reached 
the Grand Duke in command of the Guards there was no reason why it should not rea
ch the Pavlograd regiment, which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhoo
d. And so it was decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courie
r to Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were from the o
ld count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, and finally there were s
ix thousand rubles for his outfit and various other things the old count sent to 
his son.      CHAPTER VII   On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in
 camp before Olmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperorsthe
 Russian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spent the night 
ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight to the review, reach
ing the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.  That day Nicholas Rostov received a lett
er from Boris, telling him that the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night
 ten miles from Olmutz and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money
 for him. Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, after the
ir active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed with wellprovi
sioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts of tempting wares. The Pavlog
rads held feast after feast, celebrating awards they had received for the campaig
n, and made expeditions to Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who 
had recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who had 
just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse, Bedouin, 
was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. On receiving Boris' lette
r he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dined there, drank a bottle of wine, a
nd then set off alone to the Guards' camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had no
t yet had time to get his uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated wit
h a soldier's cross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leath
er, and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was riding was one
 he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign, and he wore a crumpled hussar 
cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As he rode up to the camp he tho
ught how he would impress Boris and all his comrades of the Guards by his appeara
ncethat of a fighting hussar who had been under fire.  The Guards had made their 
whole march as if on a pleasure trip, parading their cleanliness and discipline. 
They had come by easy stages, their knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian
 authorities had provided excellent dinners for the officers at every halting pla
ce. The regiments had entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by 
the Grand Duke's orders the men had marched all the way in step a practice on whi
ch the Guards prided themselves, the officers on foot and at their proper posts. 
Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way, with Berg who was already 
in command of a company. Berg, who had obtained his captaincy during the campaign
, had gained the confidence of his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and 
had arranged his money matters very satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, h
ad made the acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by a 
letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become acquainted with Pr
ince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtain a post on the commander in
 chief's staff. Berg and Boris, having rested after yesterday's march, were sitti
ng, clean and neatly dressed, at a round table in the clean quarters allotted to 
them, playing chess. Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the ac
curate way characteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen with 
his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched his opponent's
 face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thought only of whatever he
 was engaged on.  "Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.  "We
'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing his hand.  At that m
oment the door opened.  "Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, 
you petisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russian nurse'
s French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago.  "Dear me, how you have c
hanged!"  Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady and r
eplace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace his friend, but N
icholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth, that dread of beaten tr
acks, and wish to express itself in a manner different from that of its elders wh
ich is often insincere, Nicholas wished to do something special on meeting his fr
iend. He wanted to pinch him, push him, do anything but kiss hima thing everybody
 did. But notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way and k
issed him three times.  They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the
 age when young men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense chang
es in the other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken th
ose first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and both were in a 
hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them.  "Oh, you damned dandies!
 Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete, not like us sinners of the line," cr
ied Rostov, with martial swagger and with baritone notes in his voice, new to Bor
is, pointing to his own mudbespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Ros
tov's loud voice, popped her head in at the door.  "Eh, is she pretty?" he asked 
with a wink.  "Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did not
 expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday by Bolkonskian 
adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did not think he would get it to
 you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Been under fire already?" asked Boris.  Wi
thout answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. George fastened to the c
ording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm, glanced at Berg with a smil
e.  "As you see," he said.  "Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we
 too have had a splendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness r
ode with our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and every advant
age. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! I can't tell you. 
And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our officers."  And the two friends to
ld each other of their doings, the one of his hussar revels and life in the fight
ing line, the other of the pleasures and advantages of service under members of t
he Imperial family.  "Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine." 
 Boris made a grimace.  "If you really want it," said he.  He went to his bed, dr
ew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sent for wine.  "Yes, and I have some
 money and a letter to give you," he added.  Rostov took the letter and, throwing
 the money on the sofa, put both arms on the table and began to read. After readi
ng a few lines, he glanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face 
behind the letter.  "Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the hea
vy purse that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. I c
an tell you for myself..."  "I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you
 get a letter from home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk eve
rything over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of your w
ay! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, and immediately sei
zing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his face, evidently wishing to 
soften the rudeness of his words, he added, "Don't be hurt, my dear fellow you kn
ow I speak from my heart as to an old acquaintance."  "Oh, don't mention it, Coun
t! I quite understand," said Berg, getting up and speaking in a muffled and guttu
ral voice.  "Go across to our hosts they invited you," added Boris.  Berg put on 
the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust, stood before a looking gl
ass and brushed the hair on his temples upwards, in the way affected by the Emper
or Alexander, and, having assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that h
is coat had been noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.  "Oh dear, what a 
beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter.  "Why?"  "Oh, what a pig I a
m, not to have written and to have given them such a fright! Oh, what a pig I am!
" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well, have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All
 right let's have some!"  In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of
 recommendation to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice 
had obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to take it t
o its destination and make use of it.  "What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rost
ov, throwing the letter under the table.  "Why have you thrown that away?" asked 
Boris.  "It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want it for!"
  "Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading the address. "Thi
s letter would be of great use to you."  "I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's
 adjutant."  "Why not?" inquired Boris.  "It's a lackey's job!"  "You are still t
he same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking his head.  "And you're still the
 same diplomatist! But that's not the point... Come, how are you?" asked Rostov. 
 "Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I should much li
ke to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."  "Why?"  "Because when once a 
man starts on military service, he should try to make as successful a career of i
t as possible."  "Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something el
se.  He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidently trying 
in vain to find the answer to some question.  Old Gabriel brought in the wine.  "
Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you. I can't."
  "Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" asked Rostov, w
ith a contemptuous smile.  "He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow,
" answered Boris.  Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg
 returned, and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officers be
came animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how they had been mad
e much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of the sayings and doings of 
their commander, the Grand Duke, and told stories of his kindness and irascibilit
y. Berg, as usual, kept silent when the subject did not relate to himself, but in
 connection with the stories of the Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gus
to how in Galicia he had managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made
 a tour of the regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With 
a pleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in a violen
t passion, shouting "Arnauts!" "Arnauts" was the Tsarevich's favorite expression 
when he was in a rage and called for the company commander.  "Would you believe i
t, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew I was right. Without boasting,
 you know, I may say that I know the Army Orders by heart and know the Regulation
s as well as I do the Lord's Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in 
my company, and so my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." Berg stood up a
nd showed how he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it would
 have been difficult for a face to express greater respect and selfcomplacency th
an his did. "Well, he stormed at me, as the saying is, stormed and stormed and st
ormed! It was not a matter of life but rather of death, as the saying is. 'Albani
ans!' and 'devils!' and 'To Siberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew 
I was in the right so I kept silent was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you du
mb?' he shouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next 
day it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what keeping one's
 head means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting his pipe and emitting ri
ngs of smoke.  "Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.  But Boris noticed tha
t he was preparing to make fun of Berg, and skillfully changed the subject. He as
ked him to tell them how and where he got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he b
egan talking about it, and as he went on became more and more animated. He told t
hem of his Schon Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle ge
nerally do describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as they have
 heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as it really wa
s. Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no account have told a deliberate
 lie. He began his story meaning to tell everything just as it happened, but impe
rceptibly, involuntarily, and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told
 the truth to his hearerswho like himself had often heard stories of attacks and 
had formed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hear just 
such a storythey would either not have believed him or, still worse, would have t
hought that Rostov was himself to blame since what generally happens to the narra
tors of cavalry attacks had not happened to him. He could not tell them simply th
at everyone went at a trot and that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm an
d then ran as hard as he could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell e
verything as it really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort o
f will to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth, and yo
ung people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story of how beside h
imself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like a storm at the square, c
ut his way in, slashed right and left, how his saber had tasted flesh and he had 
fallen exhausted, and so on. And so he told them all that.  In the middle of his 
story, just as he was saying "You cannot imagine what a strange frenzy one experi
ences during an attack," Prince Andrew, whom Boris was expecting, entered the roo
m. Prince Andrew, who liked to help young men, was flattered by being asked for h
is assistance and being well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him
 the day before, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent with
 papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to find him 
alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recounting his military expl
oits Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man, he gave Boris a pleasant sm
ile, frowned as with halfclosed eyes he looked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wear
ily, and sat down languidly on the sofa he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in 
on bad company. Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was
 a mere stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamed 
of the hussar of the line.  In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical to
ne, in spite of the contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of v
iew, regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomer was ev
idently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent. Boris inquired wha
t news there might be on the staff, and what, without indiscretion, one might ask
 about our plans.  "We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently relu
ctant to say more in the presence of a stranger.  Berg took the opportunity to as
k, with great politeness, whether, as was rumored, the allowance of forage money 
to captains of companies would be doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a 
smile that he could give no opinion on such an important government order, and Be
rg laughed gaily.  "As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Bor
is, "we will talk of it later" and he looked round at Rostov. "Come to me after t
he review and we will do what is possible."  And, having glanced round the room, 
Prince Andrew turned to Rostov, whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassme
nt now changing to anger he did not condescend to notice, and said "I think you w
ere talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"  "I was there," said Ro
stov angrily, as if intending to insult the aidedecamp.  Bolkonski noticed the hu
ssar's state of mind, and it amused him. With a slightly contemptuous smile, he s
aid "Yes, there are many stories now told about that affair!"  "Yes, stories!" re
peated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grown furious, now at Boris, now
 at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But our stories are the stories of men who hav
e been under the enemy's fire! Our stories have some weight, not like the stories
 of those fellows on the staff who get rewards without doing anything!"  "Of whom
 you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet and particularly ami
able smile.  A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man's 
selfpossession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.  "I am not talking about 
you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, I don't want to. I am speaking of 
the staff in general."  "And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in 
a tone of quiet authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with y
ou that it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient selfrespect, but
 admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or two we shall al
l have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, and besides, Drubetskoy, 
who says he is an old friend of yours, is not at all to blame that my face has th
e misfortune to displease you. However," he added rising, "you know my name and w
here to find me, but don't forget that I do not regard either myself or you as ha
ving been at all insulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the m
atter drop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you, Drubetskoy.
 Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to them both he went out.  O
nly when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought to have said. A
nd he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. He ordered his horse at o
nce and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode home. Should he go to headquarters ne
xt day and challenge that affected adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was t
he question that worried him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he w
ould have at seeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered
 by his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knew there 
was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that very adjutant whom he
 so hated.      CHAPTER VIII   The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a revi
ew was held of the Austrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from R
ussia and those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, the Rus
sian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke, inspected t
he allied army of eighty thousand men.  From early morning the smart clean troops
 were on the move, forming up on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of 
feet and bayonets moved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners 
flying, formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses of infantr
y in different uniforms now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofs and the jingling
 of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braided uniforms, with smartly dressed 
bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan, or gray horses then again, spreading ou
t with the brazen clatter of the polished shining cannon that quivered on the gun
 carriages and with the smell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled betw
een the infantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only the gen
erals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawn in to the ut
most, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, and wearing scarves and 
all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded officers, but every soldier 
with his freshly washed and shaven face and his weapons clean and polished to the
 utmost, and every horse groomed till its coat shone like satin and every hair of
 its wetted mane lay smoothfelt that no small matter was happening, but an import
ant and solemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his own i
nsignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and yet at the sam
e time was conscious of his strength as a part of that enormous whole.  From earl
y morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by ten o'clock all had b
een brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up on the vast field. The whole 
army was extended in three lines the cavalry in front, behind it the artillery, a
nd behind that again the infantry.  A space like a street was left between each t
wo lines of troops. The three parts of that army were sharply distinguished Kutuz
ov's fighting army with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front those rece
ntly arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line and the Austrian 
troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under one command, and in a like or
der.  Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper "They're coming! They're comin
g!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparation swept over all the
 troops.  From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seen approac
hing. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gust of wind blowing 
over the army slightly stirred the streamers on the lances and the unfolded stand
ards fluttered against their staffs. It looked as if by that slight motion the ar
my itself was expressing its joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was h
eard shouting "Eyes front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was 
repeated by others from various sides and all became silent.  In the deathlike st
illness only the tramp of horses was heard. This was the Emperors' suites. The Em
perors rode up to the flank, and the trumpets of the first cavalry regiment playe
d the general march. It seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as 
if the army itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst into
 music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the Emperor Alexande
r was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and the first regiment roared
 "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, and joyfully that the men themselves wer
e awed by their multitude and the immensity of the power they constituted.  Rosto
v, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsar approached first,
 experienced the same feeling as every other man in that army a feeling of selffo
rgetfulness, a proud consciousness of might, and a passionate attraction to him w
ho was the cause of this triumph.  He felt that at a single word from that man al
l this vast mass and he himself an insignificant atom in it would go through fire
 and water, commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he cou
ld not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word.  "Hur
rah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment after another greeti
ng the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then "Hurrah!"... Then the general
 march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growing ever stronger and fuller and merging 
into a deafening roar.  Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence an
d immobility seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became ali
ve, its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he had already pas
sed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices, amid the square mas
ses of troops standing motionless as if turned to stone, hundreds of riders compo
sing the suites moved carelessly but symmetrically and above all freely, and in f
ront of them two menthe Emperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate att
ention of that whole mass of men was concentrated.  The handsome young Emperor Al
exander, in the uniform of the Horse Guards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks 
front and back, with his pleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attrac
ted everyone's attention.  Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his k
een sight had recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within tw
enty paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of his handsome, 
happy young face, he experienced a feeling tenderness and ecstasy such as he had 
never before known. Every trait and every movement of the Tsar's seemed to him en
chanting.  Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in French
 to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.  Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smi
led himself and felt a still stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed t
o show that love in some way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cr
y. The Tsar called the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him.  "Oh 
God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thought Rostov. "I shou
ld die of happiness!"  The Tsar addressed the officers also "I thank you all, gen
tlemen, I thank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like a voi
ce from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!  "You have ea
rned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them."  "Oh, to die, to die
 for him," thought Rostov.  The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hea
r, and the soldiers, straining their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!"  Rostov too, bendin
g over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with all his might, feeling that he would li
ke to injure himself by that shout, if only to express his rapture fully.  The Ts
ar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided.  "How can the E
mperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then even this indecision appeared to h
im majestic and enchanting, like everything else the Tsar did.  That hesitation l
asted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in the narrow pointed boot then fashionab
le, touched the groin of the bobtailed bay mare he rode, his hand in a white glov
e gathered up the reins, and he moved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying s
ea of aidesdecamp. Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at other regiments,
 till at last only his white plumes were visible to Rostov from amid the suites t
hat surrounded the Emperors.  Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bo
lkonski, sitting his horse indolently and carelessly. Rostov recalled their quarr
el of yesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or ought not t
o challenge Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he now thought. "Is it worth thinking or 
speaking of it at such a moment? At a time of such love, such rapture, and such s
elfsacrifice, what do any of our quarrels and affronts matter? I love and forgive
 everybody now."  When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troop
s began a ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently purchased fr
om Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadronthat is, alone and in full 
view of the Emperor.  Before he reached him, Rostov, who was a splendid horseman,
 spurred Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which the an
imal went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, his tail extende
d, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor's eye upon him, passed splendidly
, lifting his feet with a high and graceful action, as if flying through the air 
without touching the ground.  Rostov himself, his legs well back and his stomach 
drawn in and feeling himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a fro
wning but blissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed it.  "Fine fell
ows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor.  "My God, how happy I should be if he
 ordered me to leap into the fire this instant!" thought Rostov.  When the review
 was over, the newly arrived officers, and also Kutuzov's, collected in groups an
d began to talk about the awards, about the Austrians and their uniforms, about t
heir lines, about Bonaparte, and how badly the latter would fare now, especially 
if the Essen corps arrived and Prussia took our side.  But the talk in every grou
p was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander. His every word and movement was descri
bed with ecstasy.  They all had but one wish to advance as soon as possible again
st the enemy under the Emperor's command. Commanded by the Emperor himself they c
ould not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might so thought Rostov and most 
of the officers after the review.  All were then more confident of victory than t
he winning of two battles would have made them.      CHAPTER IX   The day after t
he review, Boris, in his best uniform and with his comrade Berg's best wishes for
 success, rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski, wishing to profit by his friendliness 
and obtain for himself the best post he couldpreferably that of adjutant to some 
important personage, a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive. 
"It is all very well for Rostov, whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at a 
time, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not be anyone's lackey, 
but I who have nothing but my brains have to make a career and must not miss oppo
rtunities, but must avail myself of them!" he reflected.  He did not find Prince 
Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearance of the town where the headquarters 
and the diplomatic corps were stationed and the two Emperors were living with the
ir suites, households, and courts only strengthened his desire to belong to that 
higher world.  He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all the
se exalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriages with thei
r plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military men, seemed so immeasu
rably above him, an insignificant officer of the Guards, that they not only did n
ot wish to, but simply could not, be aware of his existence. At the quarters of t
he commander in chief, Kutuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutant
s and even the orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a
 great many officers like him were always coming there and that everybody was hea
rtily sick of them. In spite of this, or rather because of it, next day, November
 15, after dinner he again went to Olmutz and, entering the house occupied by Kut
uzov, asked for Bolkonski. Prince Andrew was in and Boris was shown into a large 
hall probably formerly used for dancing, but in which five beds now stood, and fu
rniture of various kinds a table, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest
 the door, was sitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown, writing. Another,
 the red, stout Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head, laughing wi
th an officer who had sat down beside him. A third was playing a Viennese waltz o
n the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on the clavichord, sang the tune. Bolkons
ki was not there. None of these gentlemen changed his position on seeing Boris. T
he one who was writing and whom Boris addressed turned round crossly and told him
 Bolkonski was on duty and that he should go through the door on the left into th
e reception room if he wished to see him. Boris thanked him and went to the recep
tion room, where he found some ten officers and generals.  When he entered, Princ
e Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously with that peculiar expression of polit
e weariness which plainly says, "If it were not my duty I would not talk to you f
or a moment", was listening to an old Russian general with decorations, who stood
 very erect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on his purp
le face, reporting something.  "Very well, then, be so good as to wait," said Pri
nce Andrew to the general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he aff
ected when he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticing Boris, Prince Andrew, 
paying no more heed to the general who ran after him imploring him to hear someth
ing more, nodded and turned to him with a cheerful smile.  At that moment Boris c
learly realized what he had before surmised, that in the army, besides the subord
ination and discipline prescribed in the military code, which he and the others k
new in the regiment, there was another, more important, subordination, which made
 this tightlaced, purplefaced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andr
ew, for his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy. More than eve
r was Boris resolved to serve in future not according to the written code, but un
der this unwritten law. He felt now that merely by having been recommended to Pri
nce Andrew he had already risen above the general who at the front had the power 
to annihilate him, a lieutenant of the Guards. Prince Andrew came up to him and t
ook his hand.  "I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussing a
bout with Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions. Whe
n Germans start being accurate, there's no end to it!"  Boris smiled, as if he un
derstood what Prince Andrew was alluding to as something generally known. But it 
was the first time he had heard Weyrother's name, or even the term "dispositions.
"  "Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have been thinki
ng about you."  "Yes, I was thinking"for some reason Boris could not help blushin
g"of asking the commander in chief. He has had a letter from Prince Kuragin about
 me. I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards won't be in action," he added
 as if in apology.  "All right, all right. We'll talk it over," replied Prince An
drew. "Only let me report this gentleman's business, and I shall be at your dispo
sal."  While Prince Andrew went to report about the purplefaced general, that gen
tlemanevidently not sharing Boris' conception of the advantages of the unwritten 
code of subordinationlooked so fixedly at the presumptuous lieutenant who had pre
vented his finishing what he had to say to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfort
able. He turned away and waited impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from the c
ommander in chief's room.  "You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about y
ou," said Prince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where the clavicho
rd was. "It's no use your going to the commander in chief. He would say a lot of 
pleasant things, ask you to dinner" "That would not be bad as regards the unwritt
en code," thought Boris, "but nothing more would come of it. There will soon be a
 battalion of us aidesdecamp and adjutants! But this is what we'll do I have a go
od friend, an adjutant general and an excellent fellow, Prince Dolgorukov and tho
ugh you may not know it, the fact is that now Kutuzov with his staff and all of u
s count for nothing. Everything is now centered round the Emperor. So we will go 
to Dolgorukov I have to go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him about yo
u. We shall see whether he cannot attach you to himself or find a place for you s
omewhere nearer the sun."  Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had
 to guide a young man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining h
elp of this kind for another, which from pride he would never accept for himself,
 he kept in touch with the circle which confers success and which attracted him. 
He very readily took up Boris' cause and went with him to Dolgorukov.  It was lat
e in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutz occupied by the Emperors 
and their retinues.  That same day a council of war had been held in which all th
e members of the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, cont
rary to the views of the old generals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, it had b
een decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte. The council of w
ar was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris arrived at the palace to
 find Dolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters was still under the spell of the day's
 council, at which the party of the young had triumphed. The voices of those who 
counseled delay and advised waiting for something else before advancing had been 
so completely silenced and their arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence o
f the advantages of attacking that what had been discussed at the councilthe comi
ng battle and the victory that would certainly result from itno longer seemed to 
be in the future but in the past. All the advantages were on our side. Our enormo
us forces, undoubtedly superior to Napoleon's, were concentrated in one place, th
e troops inspired by the Emperors' presence were eager for action. The strategic 
position where the operations would take place was familiar in all its details to
 the Austrian General Weyrother a lucky accident had ordained that the Austrian a
rmy should maneuver the previous year on the very fields where the French had now
 to be fought the adjacent locality was known and shown in every detail on the ma
ps, and Bonaparte, evidently weakened, was undertaking nothing.  Dolgorukov, one 
of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just returned from the council, tired 
and exhausted but eager and proud of the victory that had been gained. Prince And
rew introduced his protege, but Prince Dolgorukov politely and firmly pressing hi
s hand said nothing to Boris and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts which
 were uppermost in his mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew in French.  "
Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that the one that wil
l result from it will be as victorious! However, dear fellow," he said abruptly a
nd eagerly, "I must confess to having been unjust to the Austrians and especially
 to Weyrother. What exactitude, what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, 
what foresight for every eventuality, every possibility even to the smallest deta
il! No, my dear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones could have bee
n devised. This combination of Austrian precision with Russian valorwhat more cou
ld be wished for?"  "So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.  
"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte has decidedly los
t bearings, you know that a letter was received from him today for the Emperor." 
Dolgorukov smiled significantly.  "Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bol
konski.  "What can he say? Tradiridira and so on... merely to gain time. I tell y
ou he is in our hands, that's certain! But what was most amusing," he continued, 
with a sudden, goodnatured laugh, "was that we could not think how to address the
 reply! If not as 'Consul' and of course not as 'Emperor,' it seemed to me it sho
uld be to 'General Bonaparte.'"  "But between not recognizing him as Emperor and 
calling him General Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.  "That
's just it," interrupted Dolgorukov quickly, laughing. "You know Bilibinhe's a ve
ry clever fellow. He suggested addressing him as 'Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.'"
  Dolgorukov laughed merrily.  "Only that?" said Bolkonski.  "All the same, it wa
s Bilibin who found a suitable form for the address. He is a wise and clever fell
ow."  "What was it?"  "To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvern
ement francais," said Dolgorukov, with grave satisfaction. "Good, wasn't it?"  "Y
es, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.  "Oh yes, very much! My br
other knows him, he's dined with himthe present Emperormore than once in Paris, a
nd tells me he never met a more cunning or subtle diplomatistyou know, a combinat
ion of French adroitness and Italian playacting! Do you know the tale about him a
nd Count Markov? Count Markov was the only man who knew how to handle him. You kn
ow the story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!"  And the talkative Dolgoruko
v, turning now to Boris, now to Prince Andrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test
 Markov, our ambassador, purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and sto
od looking at Markov, probably expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and how Ma
rkov immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without touching Bona
parte's.  "Delightful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as a pet
itioner on behalf of this young man. You see..." but before Prince Andrew could f
inish, an aidedecamp came in to summon Dolgorukov to the Emperor.  "Oh, what a nu
isance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly and pressing the hands of Prince A
ndrew and Boris. "You know I should be very glad to do all in my power both for y
ou and for this dear young man." Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an 
expression of goodnatured, sincere, and animated levity. "But you see... another 
time!"  Boris was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powers a
s he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here he was in cont
act with the springs that set in motion the enormous movements of the mass of whi
ch in his regiment he felt himself a tiny, obedient, and insignificant atom. They
 followed Prince Dolgorukov out into the corridor and metcoming out of the door o
f the Emperor's room by which Dolgorukov had entereda short man in civilian cloth
es with a clever face and sharply projecting jaw which, without spoiling his face
, gave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of expression. This short man nodde
d to Dolgorukov as to an intimate friend and stared at Prince Andrew with cool in
tensity, walking straight toward him and evidently expecting him to bow or to ste
p out of his way. Prince Andrew did neither a look of animosity appeared on his f
ace and the other turned away and went down the side of the corridor.  "Who was t
hat?" asked Boris.  "He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant 
of menthe Minister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.... It is such men
 as he who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with a sigh he could not 
suppress, as they passed out of the palace.  Next day, the army began its campaig
n, and up to the very battle of Austerlitz, Boris was unable to see either Prince
 Andrew or Dolgorukov again and remained for a while with the Ismaylov regiment. 
     CHAPTER X   At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in whi
ch Nicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment, moved f
rom the place where it had spent the night, advancing into action as arranged, an
d after going behind other columns for about two thirds of a mile was stopped on 
the highroad. Rostov saw the Cossacks and then the first and second squadrons of 
hussars and infantry battalions and artillery pass by and go forward and then Gen
erals Bagration and Dolgorukov ride past with their adjutants. All the fear befor
e action which he had experienced as previously, all the inner struggle to conque
r that fear, all his dreams of distinguishing himself as a true hussar in this ba
ttle, had been wasted. Their squadron remained in reserve and Nicholas Rostov spe
nt that day in a dull and wretched mood. At nine in the morning, he heard firing 
in front and shouts of hurrah, and saw wounded being brought back there were not 
many of them, and at last he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was bro
ught in, convoyed by a sotnya of Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and, tho
ugh not big, had been a successful engagement. The men and officers returning spo
ke of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of Wischau and the captu
re of a whole French squadron. The day was bright and sunny after a sharp night f
rost, and the cheerful glitter of that autumn day was in keeping with the news of
 victory which was conveyed, not only by the tales of those who had taken part in
 it, but also by the joyful expression on the faces of soldiers, officers, genera
ls, and adjutants, as they passed Rostov going or coming. And Nicholas, who had v
ainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent that happy day 
in inactivity, was all the more depressed.  "Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dw
own our gwief!" shouted Denisov, who had settled down by the roadside with a flas
k and some food.  The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talki
ng.  "There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers, indicating a 
captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot by two Cossacks.  One of 
them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he had taken from the pr
isoner.  "Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.  "If you like,
 your honor!"  The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisone
r. The French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a German accent.
 He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when he heard some Frenc
h spoken he at once began speaking to the officers, addressing first one, then an
other. He said he would not have been taken, it was not his fault but the corpora
l's who had sent him to seize some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russia
ns were there. And at every word he added "But don't hurt my little horse!" and s
troked the animal. It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he was. Now he 
excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now, imagining himself before 
his own officers, insisted on his soldierly discipline and zeal in the service. H
e brought with him into our rearguard all the freshness of atmosphere of the Fren
ch army, which was so alien to us.  The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold piec
es, and Rostov, being the richest of the officers now that he had received his mo
ney, bought it.  "But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian goodnaturedl
y to Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.  Rostov smilingly reas
sured the dragoon and gave him money.  "Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching
 the prisoner's arm to make him go on.  "The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly 
heard among the hussars.  All began to run and bustle, and Rostov saw coming up t
he road behind him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment ev
eryone was in his place, waiting.  Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to 
his place and mounted. Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his 
dejected mood amid people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly every thought 
of himself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his nearness to the Empe
ror. He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for the day he had lost.
 He was happy as a lover when the longedfor moment of meeting arrives. Not daring
 to look round and without looking round, he was ecstatically conscious of his ap
proach. He felt it not only from the sound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalc
ade, but because as he drew near everything grew brighter, more joyful, more sign
ificant, and more festive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun s
hedding beams of mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himself enve
loped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, and majestic voice t
hat was yet so simple! And as if in accord with Rostov's feeling, there was a dea
thly stillness amid which was heard the Emperor's voice.  "The Pavlograd hussars?
" he inquired.  "The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very human one compared 
to that which had said "The Pavlograd hussars?"  The Emperor drew level with Rost
ov and halted. Alexander's face was even more beautiful than it had been three da
ys before at the review. It shone with such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth
, that it suggested the liveliness of a fourteenyearold boy, and yet it was the f
ace of the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying the squadron, the Emperor'
s eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for not more than two seconds. Whether or 
no the Emperor understood what was going on in Rostov's soul it seemed to Rostov 
that he understood everything, at any rate his lightblue eyes gazed for about two
 seconds into Rostov's face. A gentle, mild light poured from them. Then all at o
nce he raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left foot, and ga
lloped on.  The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at the 
battle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelve o'clock lef
t the third column with which he had been and galloped toward the vanguard. Befor
e he came up with the hussars, several adjutants met him with news of the success
ful result of the action.  This battle, which consisted in the capture of a Frenc
h squadron, was represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the Em
peror and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over the battlefield, b
elieved that the French had been defeated and were retreating against their will.
 A few minutes after the Emperor had passed, the Pavlograd division was ordered t
o advance. In Wischau itself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the Emperor again. 
In the market place, where there had been some rather heavy firing before the Emp
eror's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom there had not been t
ime to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite of officers and courtiers, was 
riding a bobtailed chestnut mare, a different one from that which he had ridden a
t the review, and bending to one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his 
eyes and looked at a soldier who lay prone, with blood on his uncovered head. The
 wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximity to the Em
peror shocked Rostov. Rostov saw how the Emperor's rather round shoulders shudder
ed as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his left foot began convulsively ta
pping the horse's side with the spur, and how the welltrained horse looked round 
unconcerned and did not stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under 
the arms to place him on a stretcher that had been brought. The soldier groaned. 
 "Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperor apparently suffe
ring more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.  Rostov saw tears filling the
 Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he was riding away, say to Czartoryski "What a 
terrible thing war is what a terrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!
"  The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sight of the 
enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us at the least firing. T
he Emperor's gratitude was announced to the vanguard, rewards were promised, and 
the men received a double ration of vodka. The campfires crackled and the soldier
s' songs resounded even more merrily than on the previous night. Denisov celebrat
ed his promotion to the rank of major, and Rostov, who had already drunk enough, 
at the end of the feast proposed the Emperor's health. "Not 'our Sovereign, the E
mperor,' as they say at official dinners," said he, "but the health of our Sovere
ign, that good, enchanting, and great man! Let us drink to his health and to the 
certain defeat of the French!"  "If we fought before," he said, "not letting the 
French pass, as at Schon Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the fron
t? We will all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not sayi
ng it right, I have drunk a good dealbut that is how I feel, and so do you too! T
o the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!"  "Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic vo
ices of the officers.  And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastic
ally and no less sincerely than the twentyyearold Rostov.  When the officers had 
emptied and smashed their glasses, Kirsten filled others and, in shirt sleeves an
d breeches, went glass in hand to the soldiers' bonfires and with his long gray m
ustache, his white chest showing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pos
e in the light of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.  "Lads! here's to our So
vereign, the Emperor, and victory over our enemies! Hurrah!" he exclaimed in his 
dashing, old, hussar's baritone.  The hussars crowded round and responded heartil
y with loud shouts.  Late that night, when all had separated, Denisov with his sh
ort hand patted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.  "As there's no one to fal
l in love with on campaign, he's fallen in love with the Tsar," he said.  "Deniso
v, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov. "It is such a lofty, beautiful feeling, s
uch a..."  "I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove..."  "No,
 you don't understand!"  And Rostov got up and went wandering among the campfires
, dreaming of what happiness it would be to dienot in saving the Emperor's life h
e did not even dare to dream of that, but simply to die before his eyes. He reall
y was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian arms and the hope of fut
ure triumph. And he was not the only man to experience that feeling during those 
memorable days preceding the battle of Austerlitz nine tenths of the men in the R
ussian army were then in love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the 
glory of the Russian arms.      CHAPTER XI   The next day the Emperor stopped at 
Wischau, and Villier, his physician, was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headq
uarters and among the troops near by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell.
 He ate nothing and had slept badly that night, those around him reported. The ca
use of this indisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind by
 the sight of the killed and wounded.  At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French o
fficer who had come with a flag of truce, demanding an audience with the Russian 
Emperor, was brought into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. The
 Emperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. At midday he was 
admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off with Prince Dolgorukov to 
the advanced post of the French army.  It was rumored that Savary had been sent t
o propose to Alexander a meeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole
 army, a personal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Prince Dol
gorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate with Napoleon i
f, contrary to expectations, these negotiations were actuated by a real desire fo
r peace.  Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and rem
ained alone with him for a long time.  On the eighteenth and nineteenth of Novemb
er, the army advanced two days' march and the enemy's outposts after a brief inte
rchange of shots retreated. In the highest army circles from midday on the ninete
enth, a great, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till the morning of
 the twentieth, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought.  Till midday 
on the nineteenth, the activitythe eager talk, running to and fro, and dispatchin
g of adjutantswas confined to the Emperor's headquarters. But on the afternoon of
 that day, this activity reached Kutuzov's headquarters and the staffs of the com
manders of columns. By evening, the adjutants had spread it to all ends and parts
 of the army, and in the night from the nineteenth to the twentieth, the whole ei
ghty thousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of voices, and th
e army swayed and started in one enormous mass six miles long.  The concentrated 
activity which had begun at the Emperor's headquarters in the morning and had sta
rted the whole movement that followed was like the first movement of the main whe
el of a large tower clock. One wheel slowly moved, another was set in motion, and
 a third, and wheels began to revolve faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to 
work, chimes to play, figures to pop out, and the hands to advance with regular m
otion as a result of all that activity.  Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so 
in the mechanism of the military machine, an impulse once given leads to the fina
l result and just as indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is trans
mitted to them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yet reach
ed. Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another and the revolving 
pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but a neighboring wheel is as 
quiet and motionless as though it were prepared to remain so for a hundred years 
but the moment comes when the lever catches it and obeying the impulse that wheel
 begins to creak and joins in the common motion the result and aim of which are b
eyond its ken.  Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innum
erable wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the hands whic
h show the time, so the result of all the complicated human activities of 160,000
 Russians and Frenchall their passions, desires, remorse, humiliations, suffering
s, outbursts of pride, fear, and enthusiasmwas only the loss of the battle of Aus
terlitz, the socalled battle of the three Emperorsthat is to say, a slow movement
 of the hand on the dial of human history.  Prince Andrew was on duty that day an
d in constant attendance on the commander in chief.  At six in the evening, Kutuz
ov went to the Emperor's headquarters and after staying but a short time with the
 Tsar went to see the grand marshal of the court, Count Tolstoy.  Bolkonski took 
the opportunity to go in to get some details of the coming action from Dolgorukov
. He felt that Kutuzov was upset and dissatisfied about something and that at hea
dquarters they were dissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headqua
rters everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others do no
t know he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov.  "Well, how d'you do, my dear 
fellow?" said Dolgorukov, who was sitting at tea with Bilibin. "The fete is for t
omorrow. How is your old fellow? Out of sorts?"  "I won't say he is out of sorts,
 but I fancy he would like to be heard."  "But they heard him at the council of w
ar and will hear him when he talks sense, but to temporize and wait for something
 now when Bonaparte fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible."  "Y
es, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what is Bonaparte like? How di
d he impress you?"  "Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so mu
ch as a general engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing this general 
conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon. "If he weren
't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview? Why negotiate, and above
 all why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary to his method of conducting war?
 Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of a general battle. His hour has come! Mark my
 words!"  "But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew again.  "He is a
 man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him 'Your Majesty,' but 
who, to his chagrin, got no title from me! That's the sort of man he is, and noth
ing more," replied Dolgorukov, looking round at Bilibin with a smile.  "Despite m
y great respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we should be a nice set of fello
ws if we were to wait about and so give him a chance to escape, or to trick us, n
ow that we certainly have him in our hands! No, we mustn't forget Suvorov and his
 rulenot to put yourself in a position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Be
lieve me in war the energy of young men often shows the way better than all the e
xperience of old Cunctators."  "But in what position are we going to attack him? 
I have been at the outposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief for
ces are situated," said Prince Andrew.  He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan
 of attack he had himself formed.  "Oh, that is all the same," Dolgorukov said qu
ickly, and getting up he spread a map on the table. "All eventualities have been 
foreseen. If he is standing before Brunn..."  And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but i
ndistinctly explained Weyrother's plan of a flanking movement.  Prince Andrew beg
an to reply and to state his own plan, which might have been as good as Weyrother
's, but for the disadvantage that Weyrother's had already been approved. As soon 
as Prince Andrew began to demonstrate the defects of the latter and the merits of
 his own plan, Prince Dolgorukov ceased to listen to him and gazed absentmindedly
 not at the map, but at Prince Andrew's face.  "There will be a council of war at
 Kutuzov's tonight, though you can say all this there," remarked Dolgorukov.  "I 
will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.  "Whatever are you bot
hering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who, till then, had listened with an amus
ed smile to their conversation and now was evidently ready with a joke. "Whether 
tomorrow brings victory or defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Excep
t your Kutuzov, there is not a single Russian in command of a column! The command
ers are Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince de Lichtenstein, le
 Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so on like all those Polish na
mes."  "Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolgorukov. "It is not true there are now two 
Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a third, Count Arakchee
v, if his nerves were not too weak."  "However, I think General Kutuzov has come 
out," said Prince Andrew. "I wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added
 and went out after shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.  On the way home, 
Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutuzov, who was sitting silently bes
ide him, what he thought of tomorrow's battle.  Kutuzov looked sternly at his adj
utant and, after a pause, replied "I think the battle will be lost, and so I told
 Count Tolstoy and asked him to tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? '
But, my dear general, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look after military mat
ters yourself!' Yes... That was the answer I got!"      CHAPTER XII   Shortly aft
er nine o'clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his plans to Kutuzov's quarter
s where the council of war was to be held. All the commanders of columns were sum
moned to the commander in chief's and with the exception of Prince Bagration, who
 declined to come, were all there at the appointed time.  Weyrother, who was in f
ull control of the proposed battle, by his eagerness and briskness presented a ma
rked contrast to the dissatisfied and drowsy Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the 
part of chairman and president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt hi
mself to be at the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable. He 
was like a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he was pulli
ng it or being pushed by it he did not know, but rushed along at headlong speed w
ith no time to consider what this movement might lead to. Weyrother had been twic
e that evening to the enemy's picket line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to
 the Emperors, Russian and Austrian, to report and explain, and to his headquarte
rs where he had dictated the dispositions in German, and now, much exhausted, he 
arrived at Kutuzov's.  He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite 
to the commander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly, w
ithout looking at the man he was addressing, and did not reply to questions put t
o him. He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful, weary, and distracted air, 
though at the same time he was haughty and selfconfident.  Kutuzov was occupying 
a nobleman's castle of modest dimensions near Ostralitz. In the large drawing roo
m which had become the commander in chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself,
 Weyrother, and the members of the council of war. They were drinking tea, and on
ly awaited Prince Bagration to begin the council. At last Bagration's orderly cam
e with the news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came in to inform
 the commander in chief of this and, availing himself of permission previously gi
ven him by Kutuzov to be present at the council, he remained in the room.  "Since
 Prince Bagration is not coming, we may begin," said Weyrother, hurriedly rising 
from his seat and going up to the table on which an enormous map of the environs 
of Brunn was spread out.  Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat ne
ck bulged over his collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chai
r, with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms. At the sound of We
yrother's voice, he opened his one eye with an effort.  "Yes, yes, if you please!
 It is already late," said he, and nodding his head he let it droop and again clo
sed his eye.  If at first the members of the council thought that Kutuzov was pre
tending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading that followed pr
oved that the commander in chief at that moment was absorbed by a far more seriou
s matter than a desire to show his contempt for the dispositions or anything else
he was engaged in satisfying the irresistible human need for sleep. He really was
 asleep. Weyrother, with the gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment, glanced 
at Kutuzov and, having convinced himself that he was asleep, took up a paper and 
in a loud, monotonous voice began to read out the dispositions for the impending 
battle, under a heading which he also read out  "Dispositions for an attack on th
e enemy position behind Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805."  The disposi
tions were very complicated and difficult. They began as follows  "As the enemy's
 left wing rests on wooded hills and his right extends along Kobelnitz and Sokoln
itz behind the ponds that are there, while we, on the other hand, with our left w
ing by far outflank his right, it is advantageous to attack the enemy's latter wi
ng especially if we occupy the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we ca
n both fall on his flank and pursue him over the plain between Schlappanitz and t
he Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of Schlappanitz and Bellowitz which cov
er the enemy's front. For this object it is necessary that... The first column ma
rches... The second column marches... The third column marches..." and so on, rea
d Weyrother.  The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult disposit
ions. The tall, fairhaired General Buxhowden stood, leaning his back against the 
wall, his eyes fixed on a burning candle, and seemed not to listen or even to wis
h to be thought to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother, with his glistening wideop
en eyes fixed upon him and his mustache twisted upwards, sat the ruddy Miloradovi
ch in a military pose, his elbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and hi
s shoulders raised. He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at Weyrother's face, an
d only turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finished reading. Th
en Miloradovich looked round significantly at the other generals. But one could n
ot tell from that significant look whether he agreed or disagreed and was satisfi
ed or not with the arrangements. Next to Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a
 subtle smile that never left his typically southern French face during the whole
 time of the reading, gazed at his delicate fingers which rapidly twirled by its 
corners a gold snuffbox on which was a portrait. In the middle of one of the long
est sentences, he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised his head, and
 with inimical politeness lurking in the corners of his thin lips interrupted Wey
rother, wishing to say something. But the Austrian general, continuing to read, f
rowned angrily and jerked his elbows, as if to say "You can tell me your views la
ter, but now be so good as to look at the map and listen." Langeron lifted his ey
es with an expression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seeking a
n explanation, but meeting the latter's impressive but meaningless gaze drooped h
is eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.  "A geography lesson!" he 
muttered as if to himself, but loud enough to be heard.  Przebyszewski, with resp
ectful but dignified politeness, held his hand to his ear toward Weyrother, with 
the air of a man absorbed in attention. Dohkturov, a little man, sat opposite Wey
rother, with an assiduous and modest mien, and stooping over the outspread map co
nscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar locality. He asked Weyr
other several times to repeat words he had not clearly heard and the difficult na
mes of villages. Weyrother complied and Dohkturov noted them down.  When the read
ing which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron again brought his snuffbox 
to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or at anyone in particular, began to sa
y how difficult it was to carry out such a plan in which the enemy's position was
 assumed to be known, whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in mo
vement. Langeron's objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief aim 
was to show General Weyrotherwho had read his dispositions with as much selfconfi
dence as if he were addressing school childrenthat he had to do, not with fools, 
but with men who could teach him something in military matters.  When the monoton
ous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov opened his eye as a miller wakes u
p when the soporific drone of the mill wheel is interrupted. He listened to what 
Langeron said, as if remarking, "So you are still at that silly business!" quickl
y closed his eye again, and let his head sink still lower.  Langeron, trying as v
irulently as possible to sting Weyrother's vanity as author of the military plan,
 argued that Bonaparte might easily attack instead of being attacked, and so rend
er the whole of this plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with 
a firm and contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objectio
ns be they what they might.  "If he could attack us, he would have done so today,
" said he.  "So you think he is powerless?" said Langeron.  "He has forty thousan
d men at most," replied Weyrother, with the smile of a doctor to whom an old wife
 wishes to explain the treatment of a case.  "In that case he is inviting his doo
m by awaiting our attack," said Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again gla
ncing round for support to Miloradovich who was near him.  But Miloradovich was a
t that moment evidently thinking of anything rather than of what the generals wer
e disputing about.  "Ma foi!" said he, "tomorrow we shall see all that on the bat
tlefield."  Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it wa
s strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and to have to 
prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, but had also convinced
 the sovereign Emperors of.  "The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual no
ise is heard from his camp," said he. "What does that mean? Either he is retreati
ng, which is the only thing we need fear, or he is changing his position." He smi
led ironically. "But even if he also took up a position in the Thuerassa, he mere
ly saves us a great deal of trouble and all our arrangements to the minutest deta
il remain the same."  "How is that?..." began Prince Andrew, who had for long bee
n waiting an opportunity to express his doubts.  Kutuzov here woke up, coughed he
avily, and looked round at the generals.  "Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorr
owor rather for today, for it is past midnightcannot now be altered," said he. "Y
ou have heard them, and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is n
othing more important..." he paused, "than to have a good sleep."  He moved as if
 to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It was past midnight. Prince Andrew wen
t out.   The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to express 
his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasy impression. Whethe
r Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron, and the others who did not appr
ove of the plan of attack, were righthe did not know. "But was it really not poss
ible for Kutuzov to state his views plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that o
n account of court and personal considerations tens of thousands of lives, and my
 life, my life," he thought, "must be risked?"  "Yes, it is very likely that I sh
all be killed tomorrow," he thought. And suddenly, at this thought of death, a wh
ole series of most distant, most intimate, memories rose in his imagination he re
membered his last parting from his father and his wife he remembered the days whe
n he first loved her. He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for her and for 
himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he went out of the hut in
 which he was billeted with Nesvitski and began to walk up and down before it.  T
he night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamed mysteriously. "Yes, 
tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thought. "Tomorrow everything may be over for me! All the
se memories will be no more, none of them will have any meaning for me. Tomorrow 
perhaps, even certainly, I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall ha
ve to show all I can do." And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the concen
tration of fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the commanders. And t
hen that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had so long waited, presents itse
lf to him at last. He firmly and clearly expresses his opinion to Kutuzov, to Wey
rother, and to the Emperors. All are struck by the justness of his views, but no 
one undertakes to carry them out, so he takes a regiment, a divisionstipulates th
at no one is to interfere with his arrangementsleads his division to the decisive
 point, and gains the victory alone. "But death and suffering?" suggested another
 voice. Prince Andrew, however, did not answer that voice and went on dreaming of
 his triumphs. The dispositions for the next battle are planned by him alone. Nom
inally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov's staff, but he does everything alone. T
he next battle is won by him alone. Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed... "We
ll and then?" asked the other voice. "If before that you are not ten times wounde
d, killed, or betrayed, well... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answere
d himself, "I don't know what will happen and don't want to know, and can't, but 
if I want thiswant glory, want to be known to men, want to be loved by them, it i
s not my fault that I want it and want nothing but that and live only for that. Y
es, for that alone! I shall never tell anyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I 
love nothing but fame and men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of familyI fear n
othing. And precious and dear as many persons are to mefather, sister, wifethose 
dearest to meyet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give them all at onc
e for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from men I don't know and n
ever shall know, for the love of these men here," he thought, as he listened to v
oices in Kutuzov's courtyard. The voices were those of the orderlies who were pac
king up one voice, probably a coachman's, was teasing Kutuzov's old cook whom Pri
nce Andrew knew, and who was called Tit. He was saying, "Tit, I say, Tit!"  "Well
?" returned the old man.  "Go, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wag.  "Oh, go to the 
devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughter of the orderlies and servants
.  "All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, I value thi
s mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this mist!"      CHAPT
ER XIII   That same night, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front
 of Bagration's detachment. His hussars were placed along the line in couples and
 he himself rode along the line trying to master the sleepiness that kept coming 
over him. An enormous space, with our army's campfires dimly glowing in the fog, 
could be seen behind him in front of him was misty darkness. Rostov could see not
hing, peer as he would into that foggy distance now something gleamed gray, now t
here was something black, now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemy oug
ht to be, now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes. His eyes kept clo
sing, and in his fancy appearednow the Emperor, now Denisov, and now Moscow memor
iesand he again hurriedly opened his eyes and saw close before him the head and e
ars of the horse he was riding, and sometimes, when he came within six paces of t
hem, the black figures of hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty d
arkness. "Why not?... It might easily happen," thought Rostov, "that the Emperor 
will meet me and give me an order as he would to any other officer he'll say 'Go 
and find out what's there.' There are many stories of his getting to know an offi
cer in just such a chance way and attaching him to himself! What if he gave me a 
place near him? Oh, how I would guard him, how I would tell him the truth, how I 
would unmask his deceivers!" And in order to realize vividly his love devotion to
 the sovereign, Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful German, whom h
e would not only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before the
 Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout aroused him. He started and opened his eyes.  
"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass and watchwordshaft, Olmutz. 
What a nuisance that our squadron will be in reserve tomorrow," he thought. "I'll
 ask leave to go to the front, this may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor. 
It won't be long now before I am off duty. I'll take another turn and when I get 
back I'll go to the general and ask him." He readjusted himself in the saddle and
 touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars. It seemed to him that 
it was getting lighter. To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up, and facing i
t a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall. On this knoll there was a white p
atch that Rostov could not at all make out was it a glade in the wood lit up by t
he moon, or some unmelted snow, or some white houses? He even thought something m
oved on that white spot. "I expect it's snow... that spot... a spotune tache," he
 thought. "There now... it's not a tache... Natasha... sister, black eyes... Na..
. tasha... Won't she be surprised when I tell her how I've seen the Emperor? Nata
sha... take my sabretache...""Keep to the right, your honor, there are bushes her
e," came the voice of an hussar, past whom Rostov was riding in the act of fallin
g asleep. Rostov lifted his head that had sunk almost to his horse's mane and pul
led up beside the hussar. He was succumbing to irresistible, youthful, childish d
rowsiness. "But what was I thinking? I mustn't forget. How shall I speak to the E
mperor? No, that's not itthat's tomorrow. Oh yes! Natasha... sabretache... saber 
them... Whom? The hussars... Ah, the hussars with mustaches. Along the Tverskaya 
Street rode the hussar with mustaches... I thought about him too, just opposite G
uryev's house... Old Guryev.... Oh, but Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all n
onsense. The chief thing is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and wis
hed to say something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not. But that's no
nsense, the chief thing is not to forget the important thing I was thinking of. Y
es, Natasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That's right!" And his head once more sank
 to his horse's neck. All at once it seemed to him that he was being fired at. "W
hat? What? What?... Cut them down! What?..." said Rostov, waking up. At the momen
t he opened his eyes he heard in front of him, where the enemy was, the longdrawn
 shouts of thousands of voices. His horse and the horse of the hussar near him pr
icked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the shouting came from, a fir
e flared up and went out again, then another, and all along the French line on th
e hill fires flared up and the shouting grew louder and louder. Rostov could hear
 the sound of French words but could not distinguish them. The din of many voices
 was too great all he could hear was "ahahah!" and "rrrr!"  "What's that? What do
 you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussar beside him. "That must be the enemy's
 camp!"  The hussar did not reply.  "Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked again,
 after waiting for a reply.  "Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hussar reluc
tantly.  "From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov.  "It may be
 he or it may be nothing," muttered the hussar. "It's dark... Steady!" he cried t
o his fidgeting horse.  Rostov's horse was also getting restive it pawed the froz
en ground, pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shouting
 grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army of several th
ousand men could produce. The lights spread farther and farther, probably along t
he line of the French camp. Rostov no longer wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant 
shouting of the enemy army had a stimulating effect on him. "Vive l'Empereur! L'E
mpereur!" he now heard distinctly.  "They can't be far off, probably just beyond 
the stream," he said to the hussar beside him.  The hussar only sighed without re
plying and coughed angrily. The sound of horse's hoofs approaching at a trot alon
g the line of hussars was heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a se
rgeant of hussars suddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant.  "Your honor, t
he generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.  Rostov, still looking roun
d toward the fires and the shouts, rode with the sergeant to meet some mounted me
n who were riding along the line. One was on a white horse. Prince Bagration and 
Prince Dolgorukov with their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon
 of the lights and shouts in the enemy's camp. Rostov rode up to Bagration, repor
ted to him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the generals were say
ing.  "Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it is nothing 
but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to kindle fires and make 
a noise to deceive us."  "Hardly," said Bagration. "I saw them this evening on th
at knoll if they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too.... Office
r!" said Bagration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still there?"  "They w
ere there this evening, but now I don't know, your excellency. Shall I go with so
me of my hussars to see?" replied Rostov.  Bagration stopped and, before replying
, tried to see Rostov's face in the mist.  "Well, go and see," he said, after a p
ause.  "Yes, sir."  Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and tw
o other hussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the direction f
rom which the shouting came. He felt both frightened and pleased to be riding alo
ne with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous misty distance where no 
one had been before him. Bagration called to him from the hill not to go beyond t
he stream, but Rostov pretended not to hear him and did not stop but rode on and 
on, continually mistaking bushes for trees and gullies for men and continually di
scovering his mistakes. Having descended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw eit
her our own or the enemy's fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudl
y and distinctly. In the valley he saw before him something like a river, but whe
n he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out onto the road he reined i
n his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or cross it and ride over the bl
ack field up the hillside. To keep to the road which gleamed white in the mist wo
uld have been safer because it would be easier to see people coming along it. "Fo
llow me!" said he, crossed the road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop tow
ard the point where the French pickets had been standing that evening.  "Your hon
or, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him. And before Rostov had time
 to make out what the black thing was that had suddenly appeared in the fog, ther
e was a flash, followed by a report, and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist wi
th a plaintive sound passed out of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashe
d in the pan. Rostov turned his horse and galloped back. Four more reports follow
ed at intervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing in different
 tones. Rostov reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen, like his own, at the
 firing, and went back at a footpace. "Well, some more! Some more!" a merry voice
 was saying in his soul. But no more shots came.  Only when approaching Bagration
 did Rostov let his horse gallop again, and with his hand at the salute rode up t
o the general.  Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and 
had only lit fires to deceive us.  "What does that prove?" he was saying as Rosto
v rode up. "They might retreat and leave the pickets."  "It's plain that they hav
e not all gone yet, Prince," said Bagration. "Wait till tomorrow morning, we'll f
ind out everything tomorrow."  "The picket is still on the hill, your excellency,
 just where it was in the evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his ha
nd at the salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his ride a
nd especially by the sound of the bullets.  "Very good, very good," said Bagratio
n. "Thank you, officer."  "Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?"  "
What is it?"  "Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attache
d to the first squadron?"  "What's your name?"  "Count Rostov."  "Oh, very well, 
you may stay in attendance on me."  "Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov. 
 But Rostov did not reply.  "Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"  "I will 
give the order."  "Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the Em
peror," thought Rostov.  "Thank God!"   The fires and shouting in the enemy's arm
y were occasioned by the fact that while Napoleon's proclamation was being read t
o the troops the Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seeing
 him, lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon
's proclamation was as follows   Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against 
you to avenge the Austrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke at
 Hollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position we occupy is 
a strong one, and while they are marching to go round me on the right they will e
xpose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself direct your battalions. I will keep 
out of fire if you with your habitual valor carry disorder and confusion into the
 enemy's ranks, but should victory be in doubt, even for a moment, you will see y
our Emperor exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be n
o doubt of victory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor of 
the French infantry, so necessary to the honor of our nation.  Do not break your 
ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let every man be fully imbued with the
 thought that we must defeat these hirelings of England, inspired by such hatred 
of our nation! This victory will conclude our campaign and we can return to winte
r quarters, where fresh French troops who are being raised in France will join us
, and the peace I shall conclude will be worthy of my people, of you, and of myse
lf.  NAPOLEON      CHAPTER XIV   At five in the morning it was still quite dark. 
The troops of the center, the reserves, and Bagration's right flank had not yet m
oved, but on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, whic
h were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French right flank an
d drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan, were already up and ast
ir. The smoke of the campfires, into which they were throwing everything superflu
ous, made the eyes smart. It was cold and dark. The officers were hurriedly drink
ing tea and breakfasting, the soldiers, munching biscuit and beating a tattoo wit
h their feet to warm themselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flam
es the remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that they d
id not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column guides were moving
 in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds of the advance. As soo
n as an Austrian officer showed himself near a commanding officer's quarters, the
 regiment began to move the soldiers ran from the fires, thrust their pipes into 
their boots, their bags into the carts, got their muskets ready, and formed rank.
 The officers buttoned up their coats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and m
oved along the ranks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and pack
ed the wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and battalion and regimental c
ommanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave final instructions, orders, and commi
ssions to the baggage men who remained behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousa
nds of feet resounded. The column moved forward without knowing where and unable,
 from the masses around them, the smoke and the increasing fog, to see either the
 place they were leaving or that to which they were going.  A soldier on the marc
h is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment as much as a sailor is by his ship
. However far he has walked, whatever strange, unknown, and dangerous places he r
eaches, just as a sailor is always surrounded by the same decks, masts, and riggi
ng of his ship, so the soldier always has around him the same comrades, the same 
ranks, the same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich, the same company dog Jack, and the s
ame commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in which his ship is
 sailing, but on the day of battleheaven knows how and whencea stern note of whic
h all are conscious sounds in the moral atmosphere of an army, announcing the app
roach of something decisive and solemn, and awakening in the men an unusual curio
sity. On the day of battle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests
 of their regiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask concerning 
what is going on around them.  The fog had grown so dense that though it was grow
ing light they could not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees a
nd level ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one might encounte
r an enemy invisible ten paces off. But the columns advanced for a long time, alw
ays in the same fog, descending and ascending hills, avoiding gardens and enclosu
res, going over new and unknown ground, and nowhere encountering the enemy. On th
e contrary, the soldiers became aware that in front, behind, and on all sides, ot
her Russian columns were moving in the same direction. Every soldier felt glad to
 know that to the unknown place where he was going, many more of our men were goi
ng too.  "There now, the Kurskies have also gone past," was being said in the ran
ks.  "It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last night I l
ooked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regular Moscow!"  Though n
one of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked to the men the comman
ders, as we saw at the council of war, were out of humor and dissatisfied with th
e affair, and so did not exert themselves to cheer the men but merely carried out
 the orders, yet the troops marched gaily, as they always do when going into acti
on, especially to an attack. But when they had marched for about an hour in the d
ense fog, the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousness
 of some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks. How such a consciousne
ss is communicated is very difficult to define, but it certainly is communicated 
very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly, and irrepressibly, as water does i
n a creek. Had the Russian army been alone without any allies, it might perhaps h
ave been a long time before this consciousness of mismanagement became a general 
conviction, but as it was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to t
he stupid Germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had been oc
casioned by the sausage eaters.  "Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or hav
e we already come up against the French?"  "No, one can't hear them. They'd be fi
ring if we had."  "They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand
 in the middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It's all those damned Germans'
 muddling! What stupid devils!"  "Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, th
ey're crowding up behind. And now here we stand hungry."  "I say, shall we soon b
e clear? They say the cavalry are blocking the way," said an officer.  "Ah, those
 damned Germans! They don't know their own country!" said another.  "What divisio
n are you?" shouted an adjutant, riding up.  "The Eighteenth."  "Then why are you
 here? You should have gone on long ago, now you won't get there till evening."  
"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are doing!" said the of
ficer and rode off.  Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in 
Russian.  "Tafalafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said a soldier
, mimicking the general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them, the scoundrels!"  "
We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't got halfway. Fine 
orders!" was being repeated on different sides.  And the feeling of energy with w
hich the troops had started began to turn into vexation and anger at the stupid a
rrangements and at the Germans.  The cause of the confusion was that while the Au
strian cavalry was moving toward our left flank, the higher command found that ou
r center was too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were all orde
red to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed in front of the i
nfantry, who had to wait.  At the front an altercation occurred between an Austri
an guide and a Russian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry sho
uld be halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was to bl
ame. The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited. After an hour's 
delay they at last moved on, descending the hill. The fog that was dispersing on 
the hill lay still more densely below, where they were descending. In front in th
e fog a shot was heard and then another, at first irregularly at varying interval
strata... tatand then more and more regularly and rapidly, and the action at the 
Goldbach Stream began.  Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, an
d having stumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from their comma
nders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading through the ranks, an
d above all being unable to see anything in front or around them in the thick fog
, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemy lazily and advanced and again halte
d, receiving no timely orders from the officers or adjutants who wandered about i
n the fog in those unknown surroundings unable to find their own regiments. In th
is way the action began for the first, second, and third columns, which had gone 
down into the valley. The fourth column, with which Kutuzov was, stood on the Pra
tzen Heights.  Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog on
 the higher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what was going o
n in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed, six miles away, or
 whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no one knew till after eight o'cl
ock.  It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like a sea down be
low, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stood with his m
arshals around him, it was quite light. Above him was a clear blue sky, and the s
un's vast orb quivered like a huge hollow, crimson float on the surface of that m
ilky sea of mist. The whole French army, and even Napoleon himself with his staff
, were not on the far side of the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappani
tz beyond which we intended to take up our position and begin the action, but wer
e on this side, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could
 distinguish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak which he
 had worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small gray Arab horse a little in f
ront of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills which seemed to rise out of 
the sea of mist and on which the Russian troops were moving in the distance, and 
he listened to the sounds of firing in the valley. Not a single muscle of his fac
ewhich in those days was still thinmoved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently o
n one spot. His predictions were being justified. Part of the Russian force had a
lready descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes and part were leaving
 these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack and regarded as the key to the
 position. He saw over the mist that in a hollow between two hills near the villa
ge of Pratzen, the Russian columns, their bayonets glittering, were moving contin
uously in one direction toward the valley and disappearing one after another into
 the mist. From information he had received the evening before, from the sound of
 wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night, by the disorderly m
ovement of the Russian columns, and from all indications, he saw clearly that the
 allies believed him to be far away in front of them, and that the columns moving
 near Pratzen constituted the center of the Russian army, and that that center wa
s already sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But still he did not
 begin the engagement.  Today was a great day for himthe anniversary of his coron
ation. Before dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and in 
good spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happy mood
 in which everything seems possible and everything succeeds. He sat motionless, l
ooking at the heights visible above the mist, and his cold face wore that special
 look of confident, selfcomplacent happiness that one sees on the face of a boy h
appily in love. The marshals stood behind him not venturing to distract his atten
tion. He looked now at the Pratzen Heights, now at the sun floating up out of the
 mist.  When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist were 
aglow with dazzling lightas if he had only awaited this to begin the actionhe dre
w the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign with it to the marshals, and
 ordered the action to begin. The marshals, accompanied by adjutants, galloped of
f in different directions, and a few minutes later the chief forces of the French
 army moved rapidly toward those Pratzen Heights which were being more and more d
enuded by Russian troops moving down the valley to their left.      CHAPTER XV   
At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourth column, Milora
dovich's, the one that was to take the place of Przebyszewski's and Langeron's co
lumns which had already gone down into the valley. He greeted the men of the fore
most regiment and gave them the order to march, thereby indicating that he intend
ed to lead that column himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzen he hal
ted. Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number forming the commander in 
chief's suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitement and irritation, though 
controlledly calm as a man is at the approach of a longawaited moment. He was fir
mly convinced that this was the day of his Toulon, or his bridge of Arcola. How i
t would come about he did not know, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality
 and the position of our troops were known to him as far as they could be known t
o anyone in our army. His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now be ca
rried out, was forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's plan, Prince Andrew cons
idered possible contingencies and formed new projects such as might call for his 
rapidity of perception and decision.  To the left down below in the mist, the mus
ketry fire of unseen forces could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought th
e fight would concentrate. "There we shall encounter difficulties, and there," th
ought he, "I shall be sent with a brigade or division, and there, standard in han
d, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of me."  He could not look c
almly at the standards of the passing battalions. Seeing them he kept thinking, "
That may be the very standard with which I shall lead the army."  In the morning 
all that was left of the night mist on the heights was a hoar frost now turning t
o dew, but in the valleys it still lay like a milkwhite sea. Nothing was visible 
in the valley to the left into which our troops had descended and from whence cam
e the sounds of firing. Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the righ
t the vast orb of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of 
mist, some wooded hills were discernible, and it was there the enemy probably was
, for something could be descried. On the right the Guards were entering the mist
y region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now and then a gleam of bayonets to
 the left beyond the village similar masses of cavalry came up and disappeared in
 the sea of mist. In front and behind moved infantry. The commander in chief was 
standing at the end of the village letting the troops pass by him. That morning K
utuzov seemed worn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt 
without any command being given, apparently obstructed by something in front.  "D
o order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village!" he said an
grily to a general who had ridden up. "Don't you understand, your excellency, my 
dear sir, that you must not defile through narrow village streets when we are mar
ching against the enemy?"  "I intended to reform them beyond the village, your ex
cellency," answered the general.  Kutuzov laughed bitterly.  "You'll make a fine 
thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy! Very fine!"  "The enemy is still fa
r away, your excellency. According to the dispositions..."  "The dispositions!" e
xclaimed Kutuzov bitterly. "Who told you that?... Kindly do as you are ordered." 
 "Yes, sir."  "My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old ma
n is as surly as a dog."  An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plume
s in his hat galloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the fourt
h column advanced into action.  Kutuzov turned round without answering and his ey
e happened to fall upon Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutuzov's 
malevolent and caustic expression softened, as if admitting that what was being d
one was not his adjutant's fault, and still not answering the Austrian adjutant, 
he addressed Bolkonski.  "Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division 
has passed the village. Tell it to stop and await my orders."  Hardly had Prince 
Andrew started than he stopped him.  "And ask whether sharpshooters have been pos
ted," he added. "What are they doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himsel
f, still not replying to the Austrian.  Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the
 order.  Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped the thir
d division and convinced himself that there really were no sharpshooters in front
 of our columns. The colonel at the head of the regiment was much surprised at th
e commander in chief's order to throw out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure
 that there were other troops in front of him and that the enemy must be at least
 six miles away. There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren des
cent hidden by dense mist. Having given orders in the commander in chief's name t
o rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kutuzov still in the same p
lace, his stout body resting heavily in the saddle with the lassitude of age, sat
 yawning wearily with closed eyes. The troops were no longer moving, but stood wi
th the butts of their muskets on the ground.  "All right, all right!" he said to 
Prince Andrew, and turned to a general who, watch in hand, was saying it was time
 they started as all the leftflank columns had already descended.  "Plenty of tim
e, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midst of a yawn. "Plenty of time," h
e repeated.  Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regime
nts saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extended line of
 the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the person they were greeting was ridin
g quickly. When the soldiers of the regiment in front of which Kutuzov was standi
ng began to shout, he rode a little to one side and looked round with a frown. Al
ong the road from Pratzen galloped what looked like a squadron of horsemen in var
ious uniforms. Two of them rode side by side in front, at full gallop. One in a b
lack uniform with white plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse, the ot
her who was in a white uniform rode a black one. These were the two Emperors foll
owed by their suites. Kutuzov, affecting the manners of an old soldier at the fro
nt, gave the command "Attention!" and rode up to the Emperors with a salute. His 
whole appearance and manner were suddenly transformed. He put on the air of a sub
ordinate who obeys without reasoning. With an affectation of respect which eviden
tly struck Alexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.  This unpleasant impre
ssion merely flitted over the young and happy face of the Emperor like a cloud of
 haze across a clear sky and vanished. After his illness he looked rather thinner
 that day than on the field of Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first 
time abroad, but there was still the same bewitching combination of majesty and m
ildness in his fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for var
ying expression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocent youth. 
 At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic here he seemed brighter and mor
e energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping two miles, and reining in hi
s horse he sighed restfully and looked round at the faces of his suite, young and
 animated as his own. Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Prince Volkonsky, Strogonov, and 
the others, all richly dressed gay young men on splendid, wellgroomed, fresh, onl
y slightly heated horses, exchanging remarks and smiling, had stopped behind the 
Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long faced young man, sat very erect on his
 handsome black horse, looking about him in a leisurely and preoccupied manner. H
e beckoned to one of his white adjutants and asked some question"Most likely he i
s asking at what o'clock they started," thought Prince Andrew, watching his old a
cquaintance with a smile he could not repress as he recalled his reception at Bru
nn. In the Emperors' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard an
d line regiments, Russian and Austrian. Among them were grooms leading the Tsar's
 beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths.  As when a window is ope
ned a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters a stuffy room, so a whiff of yout
hfulness, energy, and confidence of success reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff wit
h the galloping advent of all these brilliant young men.  "Why aren't you beginni
ng, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperor Alexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glanc
ing courteously at the same time at the Emperor Francis.  "I am waiting, Your Maj
esty," answered Kutuzov, bending forward respectfully.  The Emperor, frowning sli
ghtly, bent his ear forward as if he had not quite heard.  "Waiting, Your Majesty
," repeated Kutuzov. Prince Andrew noted that Kutuzov's upper lip twitched unnatu
rally as he said the word "waiting." "Not all the columns have formed up yet, You
r Majesty."  The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply he shrugged his 
rather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, as if complai
ning of Kutuzov.  "You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not on the Empress' Fie
ld where a parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled," said the Tsa
r with another glance at the Emperor Francis, as if inviting him if not to join i
n at least to listen to what he was saying. But the Emperor Francis continued to 
look about him and did not listen.  "That is just why I do not begin, sire," said
 Kutuzov in a resounding voice, apparently to preclude the possibility of not bei
ng heard, and again something in his face twitched"That is just why I do not begi
n, sire, because we are not on parade and not on the Empress' Field," said clearl
y and distinctly.  In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expresse
d dissatisfaction and reproach. "Old though he may be, he should not, he certainl
y should not, speak like that," their glances seemed to say.  The Tsar looked int
ently and observantly into Kutuzov's eye waiting to hear whether he would say any
thing more. But Kutuzov, with respectfully bowed head, seemed also to be waiting.
 The silence lasted for about a minute.  "However, if you command it, Your Majest
y," said Kutuzov, lifting his head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, 
unreasoning, but submissive general.  He touched his horse and having called Milo
radovich, the commander of the column, gave him the order to advance.  The troops
 again began to move, and two battalions of the Novgorod and one of the Apsheron 
regiment went forward past the Emperor.  As this Apsheron battalion marched by, t
he redfaced Miloradovich, without his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast an
d an enormous tuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners 
front and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reined in
 his horse before the Emperor.  "God be with you, general!" said the Emperor.  "M
a foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite, sire," * he answered
 gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among the gentlemen of the Tsar's suit
e by his poor French.        * "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possib
le to      do, Sire."   Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed hims
elf a little behind the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's presence
, passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk pace.  "La
ds!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, selfconfident, and cheery voice, obviously s
o elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect of battle, and by the sight of t
he gallant Apsherons, his comrades in Suvorov's time, now passing so gallantly be
fore the Emperors, that he forgot the sovereigns' presence. "Lads, it's not the f
irst village you've had to take," cried he.  "Glad to do our best!" shouted the s
oldiers.  The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that had carr
ied the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on the field of Austerl
itz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot and pricking its ears at the so
und of shots just as it had done on the Empress' Field, not understanding the sig
nificance of the firing, nor of the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, n
or of all that was being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.  The Empe
ror turned with a smile to one of his followers and made a remark to him, pointin
g to the gallant Apsherons.      CHAPTER XVI   Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutan
ts rode at a walking pace behind the carabineers.  When he had gone less than hal
f a mile in the rear of the column he stopped at a solitary, deserted house that 
had probably once been an inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill 
and troops were marching along both.  The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops
 were already dimly visible about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. 
Down below, on the left, the firing became more distinct. Kutuzov had stopped and
 was speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behind look
ing at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass.  "Look, look!" s
aid this adjutant, looking not at the troops in the distance, but down the hill b
efore him. "It's the French!"  The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the
 field glass, trying to snatch it from one another. The expression on all their f
aces suddenly changed to one of horror. The French were supposed to be a mile and
 a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just in front of us.  "I
t's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But how is that?" sai
d different voices.  With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right
, not more than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, a dense Frenc
h column coming up to meet the Apsherons.  "Here it is! The decisive moment has a
rrived. My turn has come," thought Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode 
up to Kutuzov.  "The Apsherons must be stopped, your excellency," cried he. But a
t that very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard quite clo
se at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from Prince Andrew shout
ed, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at this as if at a command, everyone began to run
.  Confused and everincreasing crowds were running back to where five minutes bef
ore the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only would it have been difficult to 
stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to be carried back with it oneself. B
olkonski only tried not to lose touch with it, and looked around bewildered and u
nable to grasp what was happening in front of him. Nesvitski with an angry face, 
red and unlike himself, was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did not ride away at o
nce he would certainly be taken prisoner. Kutuzov remained in the same place and 
without answering drew out a handkerchief. Blood was flowing from his cheek. Prin
ce Andrew forced his way to him.  "You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able to mas
ter the trembling of his lower jaw.  "The wound is not here, it is there!" said K
utuzov, pressing the handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleein
g soldiers. "Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing t
hat it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the right.  A f
resh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it.  The troops wer
e running in such a dense mass that once surrounded by them it was difficult to g
et out again. One was shouting, "Get on! Why are you hindering us?" Another in th
e same place turned round and fired in the air a third was striking the horse Kut
uzov himself rode. Having by a great effort got away to the left from that flood 
of men, Kutuzov, with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward a sound
 of artillery fire near by. Having forced his way out of the crowd of fugitives, 
Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, saw on the slope of the hill amid the
 smoke a Russian battery that was still firing and Frenchmen running toward it. H
igher up stood some Russian infantry, neither moving forward to protect the batte
ry nor backward with the fleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himself from 
the infantry and approached Kutuzov. Of Kutuzov's suite only four remained. They 
were all pale and exchanged looks in silence.  "Stop those wretches!" gasped Kutu
zov to the regimental commander, pointing to the flying soldiers but at that inst
ant, as if to punish him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regimen
t and across Kutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.  The French had attack
ed the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were firing at him. After this volley the reg
imental commander clutched at his leg several soldiers fell, and a second lieuten
ant who was holding the flag let it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but 
caught on the muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firing withou
t orders.  "Oh! Oh! Oh!" groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around.... "Bolk
onski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness of the feebleness 
of age, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointing to the disordered battalion and at th
e enemy, "what's that?"  But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feel
ing tears of shame and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse and ru
n to the standard.  "Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child's.
  "Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and hearing with pl
easure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him. Several soldiers fell.  "Hu
rrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up the heavy standard, h
e ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalion would follow him.  An
d really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and then another and so
on the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hurrah!" and overtook him. A sergean
t of the battalion ran up and took the flag that was swaying from its weight in P
rince Andrew's hands, but he was immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized t
he standard and, dragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he
 saw our artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having abandoned
 their guns, were running toward him. He also saw French infantry soldiers who we
re seizing the artillery horses and turning the guns round. Prince Andrew and the
 battalion were already within twenty paces of the cannon. He heard the whistle o
f bullets above him unceasingly and to right and left of him soldiers continually
 groaned and dropped. But he did not look at them he looked only at what was goin
g on in front of himat the battery. He now saw clearly the figure of a redhaired 
gunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while a French soldi
er tugged at the other. He could distinctly see the distraught yet angry expressi
on on the faces of these two men, who evidently did not realize what they were do
ing.  "What are they about?" thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them. "Why does
n't the redhaired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Why doesn't the Frenchman sta
b him? He will not get away before the Frenchman remembers his bayonet and stabs 
him...."  And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to the s
truggling men, and the fate of the redhaired gunner, who had triumphantly secured
 the mop and still did not realize what awaited him, was about to be decided. But
 Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. It seemed to him as though one of the so
ldiers near him hit him on the head with the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a 
little, but the worst of it was that the pain distracted him and prevented his se
eing what he had been looking at.  "What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving
 way," thought he, and fell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how th
e struggle of the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the redhaired gunner 
had been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved. But he 
saw nothing. Above him there was now nothing but the skythe lofty sky, not clear 
yet still immeasurably lofty, with gray clouds gliding slowly across it. "How qui
et, peaceful, and solemn not at all as I ran," thought Prince Andrew"not as we ra
n, shouting and fighting, not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frighte
ned and angry faces struggled for the mop how differently do those clouds glide a
cross that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that lofty sky before? An
d how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All is vanity, all falsehood, exc
ept that infinite sky. There is nothing, nothing, but that. But even it does not 
exist, there is nothing but quiet and peace. Thank God!..."      CHAPTER XVII   O
n our right flank commanded by Bagration, at nine o'clock the battle had not yet 
begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's demand to commence the action, and wi
shing to avert responsibility from himself, Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgoruk
ov to send to inquire of the commander in chief. Bagration knew that as the dista
nce between the two flanks was more than six miles, even if the messenger were no
t killed which he very likely would be, and found the commander in chief which wo
uld be very difficult, he would not be able to get back before evening.  Bagratio
n cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite, and the boyish fac
e Rostov, breathless with excitement and hope, was the first to catch his eye. He
 sent him.  "And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander in chie
f, your excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap.  "You can give the me
ssage to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov, hurriedly interrupting Bagration.  On bei
ng relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a few hours' sleep before 
morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute, with elasticity of movement, faith
 in his good fortune, and generally in that state of mind which makes everything 
seem possible, pleasant, and easy.  All his wishes were being fulfilled that morn
ing there was to be a general engagement in which he was taking part, more than t
hat, he was orderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was going with a m
essage to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morning was bright,
 he had a good horse under him, and his heart was full of joy and happiness. On r
eceiving the order he gave his horse the rein and galloped along the line. At fir
st he rode along the line of Bagration's troops, which had not yet advanced into 
action but were standing motionless then he came to the region occupied by Uvarov
's cavalry and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle having 
passed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon and musketry ahead o
f him. The firing grew louder and louder.  In the fresh morning air were now hear
d, not two or three musket shots at irregular intervals as before, followed by on
e or two cannon shots, but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the h
ill before Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimes
 several of them were not separated from one another but merged into a general ro
ar.  He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one another down t
he hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading, and mingling with on
e another. He could also, by the gleam of bayonets visible through the smoke, mak
e out moving masses of infantry and narrow lines of artillery with green caissons
.  Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was going on, b
ut strain his attention as he would he could not understand or make out anything 
of what was happening there in the smoke men of some sort were moving about, in f
ront and behind moved lines of troops but why, whither, and who they were, it was
 impossible to make out. These sights and sounds had no depressing or intimidatin
g effect on him on the contrary, they stimulated his energy and determination.  "
Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds, and again pro
ceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farther and farther into the region 
where the army was already in action.  "How it will be there I don't know, but al
l will be well!" thought Rostov.  After passing some Austrian troops he noticed t
hat the next part of the line the Guards was already in action.  "So much the bet
ter! I shall see it close," he thought.  He was riding almost along the front lin
e. A handful of men came galloping toward him. They were our Uhlans who with diso
rdered ranks were returning from the attack. Rostov got out of their way, involun
tarily noticed that one of them was bleeding, and galloped on.  "That is no busin
ess of mine," he thought. He had not ridden many hundred yards after that before 
he saw to his left, across the whole width of the field, an enormous mass of cava
lry in brilliant white uniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight towar
d him and across his path. Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of the 
way of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued at the same spee
d, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of the horses were already g
alloping. Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs and the jingle of their weapons an
d saw their horses, their figures, and even their faces, more and more distinctly
. They were our Horse Guards, advancing to attack the French cavalry that was com
ing to meet them.  The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their ho
rses. Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command "Charge!" shoute
d by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed. Rostov, fearing to
 be crushed or swept into the attack on the French, galloped along the front as h
ard as his horse could go, but still was not in time to avoid them.  The last of 
the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrily on seeing Rostov befo
re him, with whom he would inevitably collide. This Guardsman would certainly hav
e bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak comp
ared to these gigantic men and horses had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish h
is whip before the eyes of the Guardsman's horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen 
hands high, shied, throwing back its ears but the pockmarked Guardsman drove his 
huge spurs in violently, and the horse, flourishing its tail and extending its ne
ck, galloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse Guards passed Rostov before he h
eard them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back saw that their foremost ranks were mi
xed up with some foreign cavalry with red epaulets, probably French. He could see
 nothing more, for immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and 
smoke enveloped everything.  At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed h
im, disappeared in the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to
 go where he was sent. This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that ama
zed the French themselves. Rostov was horrified to hear later that of all that ma
ss of huge and handsome men, of all those brilliant, rich youths, officers and ca
dets, who had galloped past him on their thousandruble horses, only eighteen were
 left after the charge.  "Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and mayb
e I shall see the Emperor immediately!" thought Rostov and galloped on.  When he 
came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and around them cannon
 balls were flying, of which he was aware not so much because he heard their soun
d as because he saw uneasiness on the soldiers' faces and unnatural warlike solem
nity on those of the officers.  Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of 
Foot Guards he heard a voice calling him by name.  "Rostov!"  "What?" he answered
, not recognizing Boris.  "I say, we've been in the front line! Our regiment atta
cked!" said Boris with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have be
en under fire for the first time.  Rostov stopped.  "Have you?" he said. "Well, h
ow did it go?"  "We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, growing talkativ
e. "Can you imagine it?" and he began describing how the Guards, having taken up 
their position and seeing troops before them, thought they were Austrians, and al
l at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged by those troops that they w
ere themselves in the front line and had unexpectedly to go into action. Rostov w
ithout hearing Boris to the end spurred his horse.  "Where are you off to?" asked
 Boris.  "With a message to His Majesty."  "There he is!" said Boris, thinking Ro
stov had said "His Highness," and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high sh
oulders and frowning brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and
 Horse Guards' jacket, shouting something to a pale, white uniformed Austrian off
icer.  "But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or the Emper
or," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse.  "Count! Count!" shouted Berg 
who ran up from the other side as eager as Boris. "Count! I am wounded in my righ
t hand" and he showed his bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it "and I 
remained at the front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our familythe 
von Bergshave been knights!"  He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to 
hear it and rode away.  Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Ro
stov, to avoid again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the H
orse Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the place whe
re the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly he heard musket fir
e quite close in front of him and behind our troops, where he could never have ex
pected the enemy to be.  "What can it be?" he thought. "The enemy in the rear of 
our army? Impossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself 
and for the issue of the whole battle. "But be that what it may," he reflected, "
there is no riding round it now. I must look for the commander in chief here, and
 if all is lost it is for me to perish with the rest."  The foreboding of evil th
at had suddenly come over Rostov was more and more confirmed the farther he rode 
into the region behind the village of Pratzen, which was full of troops of all ki
nds.  "What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who is firing?" Ro
stov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers running in confus
ed crowds across his path.  "The devil knows! They've killed everybody! It's all 
up now!" he was told in Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who 
understood what was happening as little as he did.  "Kill the Germans!" shouted o
ne.  "May the devil take themthe traitors!"  "Zum Henker diese Russen!" * muttere
d a German.       * "Hang these Russians!"   Several wounded men passed along the
 road, and words of abuse, screams, and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then 
the firing died down. Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had
 been firing at one another.  "My God! What does it all mean?" thought he. "And h
ere, where at any moment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only 
a handful of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, it can't be! Onl
y to get past them quicker, quicker!"  The idea of defeat and flight could not en
ter Rostov's head. Though he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen H
eights just where he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief, he coul
d not, did not wish to, believe that.      CHAPTER XVIII   Rostov had been ordere
d to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near the village of Pratzen. But neither th
ey nor a single commanding officer were there, only disorganized crowds of troops
 of various kinds. He urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these 
crowds, but the farther he went the more disorganized they were. The highroad on 
which he had come out was thronged with caleches, carriages of all sorts, and Rus
sian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded and some not. This whole mas
s droned and jostled in confusion under the dismal influence of cannon balls flyi
ng from the French batteries stationed on the Pratzen Heights.  "Where is the Emp
eror? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept asking everyone he could stop, but got no an
swer from anyone.  At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answe
r.  "Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!" said the soldier, laughing for so
me reason and shaking himself free.  Having left that soldier who was evidently d
runk, Rostov stopped the horse of a batman or groom of some important personage a
nd began to question him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a ca
rriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and that he was da
ngerously wounded.  "It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else."
  "I saw him myself," replied the man with a selfconfident smile of derision. "I 
ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I've seen him in Petersburg. I 
saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in the carriage as pale as anything. H
ow they made the four black horses fly! Gracious me, they did rattle past! It's t
ime I knew the Imperial horses and Ilya Ivanych. I don't think Ilya drives anyone
 except the Tsar!"  Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a w
ounded officer passing by addressed him  "Who is it you want?" he asked. "The com
mander in chief? He was killed by a cannon ballstruck in the breast before our re
giment."  "Not killedwounded!" another officer corrected him.  "Who? Kutuzov?" as
ked Rostov.  "Not Kutuzov, but what's his namewell, never mind... there are not m
any left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders are there," said
 the officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek, and he walked on.  Rostov ro
de on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now going. The Emperor was 
wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible to doubt it now. Rostov rode in the d
irection pointed out to him, in which he saw turrets and a church. What need to h
urry? What was he now to say to the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive a
nd unwounded?  "Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!"
 a soldier shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!"  "Oh, what are you talking ab
out?" said another. "Where is he to go? That way is nearer."  Rostov considered, 
and then went in the direction where they said he would be killed.  "It's all the
 same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to save myself?" he thought. He
 rode on to the region where the greatest number of men had perished in fleeing f
rom Pratzen. The French had not yet occupied that region, and the Russiansthe uni
njured and slightly woundedhad left it long ago. All about the field, like heaps 
of manure on wellkept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each 
couple of acres. The wounded crept together in twos and threes and one could hear
 their distressing screams and groans, sometimes feignedor so it seemed to Rostov
. He put his horse to a trot to avoid seeing all these suffering men, and he felt
 afraidafraid not for his life, but for the courage he needed and which he knew w
ould not stand the sight of these unfortunates.  The French, who had ceased firin
g at this field strewn with dead and wounded where there was no one left to fire 
at, on seeing an adjutant riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several s
hots. The sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around 
him merged in Rostov's mind into a single feeling of terror and pity for himself.
 He remembered his mother's last letter. "What would she feel," thought he, "if s
he saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimed at me?"  In the village of
 Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from the field of battle, who thou
gh still in some confusion were less disordered. The French cannon did not reach 
there and the musketry fire sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said 
that the battle was lost. No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the Emper
or or Kutuzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was correct,
 others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that had spread by the fac
t that the Emperor's carriage had really galloped from the field of battle with t
he pale and terrified OberHofmarschal Count Tolstoy, who had ridden out to the ba
ttlefield with others in the Emperor's suite. One officer told Rostov that he had
 seen someone from headquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rosto
v rode, not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When he had 
ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops, he saw, nea
r a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men on horseback facing the ditch. 
One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to Rostov the other on a beauti
ful chestnut horse which Rostov fancied he had seen before rode up to the ditch, 
struck his horse with his spurs, and giving it the rein leaped lightly over. Only
 a little earth crumbled from the bank under the horse's hind hoofs. Turning the 
horse sharply, he again jumped the ditch, and deferentially addressed the horsema
n with the white plumes, evidently suggesting that he should do the same. The rid
er, whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted his attentio
n, made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and by that gesture Rostov in
stantly recognized his lamented and adored monarch.  "But it can't be he, alone i
n the midst of this empty field!" thought Rostov. At that moment Alexander turned
 his head and Rostov saw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his
 memory. The Emperor was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the cha
rm, the mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostov was happy in the as
surance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were false. He was happy 
to be seeing him. He knew that he might and even ought to go straight to him and 
give the message Dolgorukov had ordered him to deliver.  But as a youth in love t
rembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter the thoughts he has dreamed of for nigh
ts, but looks around for help or a chance of delay and flight when the longedfor 
moment comes and he is alone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what h
e had longed for more than anything else in the world, did not know how to approa
ch the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be inconvenie
nt, unseemly, and impossible to do so.  "What! It is as if I were glad of a chanc
e to take advantage of his being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem un
pleasant or painful to him at this moment of sorrow besides, what can I say to hi
m now, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight of him?" N
ot one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that he had composed 
in his imagination could he now recall. Those speeches were intended for quite ot
her conditions, they were for the most part to be spoken at a moment of victory a
nd triumph, generally when he was dying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked h
im for heroic deeds, and while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved
.  "Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right flank no
w that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost? No, certainly I must not
 approach him, I must not intrude on his reflections. Better die a thousand times
 than risk receiving an unkind look or bad opinion from him," Rostov decided and 
sorrowfully and with a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back 
at the Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.  While Rostov
 was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away, Captain von Toll chanced to
 ride to the same spot, and seeing the Emperor at once rode up to him, offered hi
s services, and assisted him to cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishing to 
rest and feeling unwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained besid
e him. Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke long a
nd warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping, covered his eyes
 with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand.  "And I might have been in his place!
" thought Rostov, and hardly restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he ro
de on in utter despair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.  His despa
ir was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was the cause of his gr
ief.  He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. It wa
s a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not made use of 
it.... "What have I done?" thought he. And he turned round and galloped back to t
he place where he had seen the Emperor, but there was no one beyond the ditch now
. Only some carts and carriages were passing by. From one of the drivers he learn
ed that Kutuzov's staff were not far off, in the village the vehicles were going 
to. Rostov followed them. In front of him walked Kutuzov's groom leading horses i
n horsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old, bandylegged domes
tic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat.  "Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom. 
 "What?" answered the old man absentmindedly.  "Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!"  "Oh, you
 fool!" said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passed in silence, and then
 the same joke was repeated.   Before five in the evening the battle had been los
t at all points. More than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the Fren
ch.  Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other columns after lo
sing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused masses.  The remains o
f Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces were crowding around the dams and ban
ks of the ponds near the village of Augesd.  After five o'clock it was only at th
e Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade delivered by the French alone was still to be h
eard from numerous batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directe
d at our retreating forces.  In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some
 battalions kept up a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our t
roops. It was growing dusk. On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the 
old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully angling, whi
le his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled the floundering silvery fi
sh in the watering can, on that dam over which for so many years Moravians in sha
ggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully driven their twohorse carts loaded with 
wheat and had returned dusty with flour whitening their cartson that narrow dam a
mid the wagons and the cannon, under the horses' hoofs and between the wagon whee
ls, men disfigured by fear of death now crowded together, crushing one another, d
ying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to move on a few step
s and be killed themselves in the same way.  Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew
 compressing the air around, or a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, 
killing some and splashing with blood those near them.  Dolokhovnow an officerwou
nded in the arm, and on foot, with the regimental commander on horseback and some
 ten men of his company, represented all that was left of that whole regiment. Im
pelled by the crowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and, jamme
d in on all sides, had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a cannon
 and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someone behind them, an
other fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood. The crowd, pushing forward 
desperately, squeezed together, moved a few steps, and again stopped.  "Move on a
 hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here another two minutes and it
 is certain death," thought each one.  Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd
 forced his way to the edge of the dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and
 ran onto the slippery ice that covered the millpool.  "Turn this way!" he shoute
d, jumping over the ice which creaked under him "turn this way!" he shouted to th
ose with the gun. "It bears!..."  The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and
 it was plain that it would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very
 soon even under his weight alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the bank,
 hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at the entrance to the
 dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address Dolokhov. Suddenly a cannon 
ball hissed so low above the crowd that everyone ducked. It flopped into somethin
g moist, and the general fell from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him 
a look or thought of raising him.  "Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! 
Don't you hear? Go on!" innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had st
ruck the general, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they were shouting
.  One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the ice. 
Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond. The ice gave 
way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slipped into the water. He tr
ied to right himself but fell in up to his waist. The nearest soldiers shrank bac
k, the gun driver stopped his horse, but from behind still came the shouts "Onto 
the ice, why do you stop? Go on! Go on!" And cries of horror were heard in the cr
owd. The soldiers near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them 
turn and move on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, that had held under tho
se on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some forty men who were on it dashed, 
some forward and some back, drowning one another.  Still the cannon balls continu
ed regularly to whistle and flop onto the ice and into the water and oftenest of 
all among the crowd that covered the dam, the pond, and the bank.      CHAPTER XI
X   On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his hand, l
ay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously uttering a gentle
, piteous, and childlike moan.  Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite
 still. He did not know how long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again fe
lt that he was alive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head.  
"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but saw today?" was hi
s first thought. "And I did not know this suffering either," he thought. "Yes, I 
did not know anything, anything at all till now. But where am I?"  He listened an
d heard the sound of approaching horses, and voices speaking French. He opened hi
s eyes. Above him again was the same lofty sky with clouds that had risen and wer
e floating still higher, and between them gleamed blue infinity. He did not turn 
his head and did not see those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, had
 ridden up and stopped near him.  It was Napoleon accompanied by two aidesdecamp.
 Bonaparte riding over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the b
atteries firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left 
on the field.  "Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier
, who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on his stomac
h with an already stiffened arm flung wide.  "The ammunition for the guns in posi
tion is exhausted, Your Majesty," said an adjutant who had come from the batterie
s that were firing at Augesd.  "Have some brought from the reserve," said Napoleo
n, and having gone on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his
 back with the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. The flag had already b
een taken by the French as a trophy.  "That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he 
gazed at Bolkonski.  Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that 
it was Napoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But he heard
 the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not only did they not int
erest him, but he took no notice of them and at once forgot them. His head was bu
rning, he felt himself bleeding to death, and he saw above him the remote, lofty,
 and everlasting sky. He knew it was Napoleonhis herobut at that moment Napoleon 
seemed to him such a small, insignificant creature compared with what was passing
 now between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it. 
At that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him, or what wa
s said of him he was only glad that people were standing near him and only wished
 that they would help him and bring him back to life, which seemed to him so beau
tiful now that he had today learned to understand it so differently. He collected
 all his strength, to stir and utter a sound. He feebly moved his leg and uttered
 a weak, sickly groan which aroused his own pity.  "Ah! He is alive," said Napole
on. "Lift this young man up and carry him to the dressing station."  Having said 
this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat in hand, rode up smiling 
to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.  Prince Andrew remembered noth
ing more he lost consciousness from the terrible pain of being lifted onto the st
retcher, the jolting while being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dress
ing station. He did not regain consciousness till late in the day, when with othe
r wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital. During th
is transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look about him and even spe
ak.  The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French conv
oy officer, who said rapidly "We must halt here the Emperor will pass here immedi
ately it will please him to see these gentlemen prisoners."  "There are so many p
risoners today, nearly the whole Russian army, that he is probably tired of them,
" said another officer.  "All the same! They say this one is the commander of all
 the Emperor Alexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russian office
r in the white uniform of the Horse Guards.  Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin w
hom he had met in Petersburg society. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a 
wounded officer of the Horse Guards.  Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stop
ped his horse.  "Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing the prisoners.  They n
amed the colonel, Prince Repnin.  "You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander
's regiment of Horse Guards?" asked Napoleon.  "I commanded a squadron," replied 
Repnin.  "Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.  "The prais
e of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward," said Repnin.  "I bestow it
 with pleasure," said Napoleon. "And who is that young man beside you?"  Prince R
epnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen.  After looking at him Napoleon smiled.  "He's v
ery young to come to meddle with us."  "Youth is no hindrance to courage," mutter
ed Sukhtelen in a failing voice.  "A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Young man, 
you will go far!"  Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Em
peror's eyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract his att
ention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield and, address
ing him, again used the epithet "young man" that was connected in his memory with
 Prince Andrew.  "Well, and you, young man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave
?"  Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a few words to
 the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixed straight on Napoleon
, he was silent.... So insignificant at that moment seemed to him all the interes
ts that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did his hero himself with his paltry vanity a
nd joy in victory appear, compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which 
he had seen and understood, that he could not answer him.  Everything seemed so f
utile and insignificant in comparison with the stern and solemn train of thought 
that weakness from loss of blood, suffering, and the nearness of death aroused in
 him. Looking into Napoleon's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of
 greatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, and the still
 greater unimportance of death, the meaning of which no one alive could understan
d or explain.  The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to 
one of the officers as he went "Have these gentlemen attended to and taken to my 
bivouac let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir, Prince Repnin!" a
nd he spurred his horse and galloped away.  His face shone with selfsatisfaction 
and pleasure.  The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken t
he little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother's neck, but seeing t
he favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to return the holy i
mage.  Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but the little 
icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest outside his unifor
m.  "It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon his sister ha
d hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, "it would be good if every
thing were as clear and simple as it seems to Mary. How good it would be to know 
where to seek for help in this life, and what to expect after it beyond the grave
! How happy and calm I should be if I could now say 'Lord, have mercy on me!'... 
But to whom should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable, incomprehensible, w
hich I not only cannot address but which I cannot even express in wordsthe Great 
All or Nothing" said he to himself, "or to that God who has been sewn into this a
mulet by Mary! There is nothing certain, nothing at all except the unimportance o
f everything I understand, and the greatness of something incomprehensible but al
limportant."  The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurable pa
in his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father, wife,
 sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the night before the batt
le, the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, and above all this the lofty
 sky, formed the chief subjects of his delirious fancies.  The quiet home life an
d peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented itself to him. He was already enjoyi
ng that happiness when that little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsymp
athizing look of shortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and tor
ments had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward morning all these
 dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of unconciousness and obliv
ion which in the opinion of Napoleon's doctor, Larrey, was much more likely to en
d in death than in convalescence.  "He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larre
y, "and will not recover."  And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was l
eft to the care of the inhabitants of the district.      BOOK FOUR 1806      CHAP
TER I   Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave. Denisov wa
s going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with him as far as Mo
scow and to stay with him there. Meeting a comrade at the last post station but o
ne before Moscow, Denisov had drunk three bottles of wine with him and, despite t
he jolting ruts across the snowcovered road, did not once wake up on the way to M
oscow, but lay at the bottom of the sleigh beside Rostov, who grew more and more 
impatient the nearer they got to Moscow.  "How much longer? How much longer? Oh, 
these insufferable streets, shops, bakers' signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!
" thought Rostov, when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and t
hey had entered Moscow.  "Denisov! We're here! He's asleep," he added, leaning fo
rward with his whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of 
the sleigh.  Denisov gave no answer.  "There's the corner at the crossroads, wher
e the cabman, Zakhar, has his stand, and there's Zakhar himself and still the sam
e horse! And here's the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! Can't you h
urry up? Now then!"  "Which house is it?" asked the driver.  "Why, that one, righ
t at the end, the big one. Don't you see? That's our house," said Rostov. "Of cou
rse, it's our house! Denisov, Denisov! We're almost there!"  Denisov raised his h
ead, coughed, and made no answer.  "Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box,
 "those lights are in our house, aren't they?"  "Yes, sir, and there's a light in
 your father's study."  "Then they've not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Min
d now, don't forget to put out my new coat," added Rostov, fingering his new must
ache. "Now then, get on," he shouted to the driver. "Do wake up, Vaska!" he went 
on, turning to Denisov, whose head was again nodding. "Come, get on! You shall ha
ve three rubles for vodkaget on!" Rostov shouted, when the sleigh was only three 
houses from his door. It seemed to him the horses were not moving at all. At last
 the sleigh bore to the right, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov saw overhead th
e old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster broken off, the porch, and the post 
by the side of the pavement. He sprang out before the sleigh stopped, and ran int
o the hall. The house stood cold and silent, as if quite regardless of who had co
me to it. There was no one in the hall. "Oh God! Is everyone all right?" he thoug
ht, stopping for a moment with a sinking heart, and then immediately starting to 
run along the hall and up the warped steps of the familiar staircase. The wellkno
wn old door handle, which always angered the countess when it was not properly cl
eaned, turned as loosely as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom
.  Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokofy, the footman, who was so strong t
hat he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, sat plaiting slippers out
 of cloth selvedges. He looked up at the opening door and his expression of sleep
y indifference suddenly changed to one of delighted amazement.  "Gracious heavens
! The young count!" he cried, recognizing his young master. "Can it be? My treasu
re!" and Prokofy, trembling with excitement, rushed toward the drawingroom door, 
probably in order to announce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped 
to kiss the young man's shoulder.  "All well?" asked Rostov, drawing away his arm
.  "Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They've just finished supper. Let me have a look at
 you, your excellency."  "Is everything quite all right?"  "The Lord be thanked, 
yes!"  Rostov, who had completely forgotten Denisov, not wishing anyone to forest
all him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through the large dark ballroom
. All was the same there were the same old card tables and the same chandelier wi
th a cover over it but someone had already seen the young master, and, before he 
had reached the drawing room, something flew out from a side door like a tornado 
and began hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the same k
ind sprang from a second door and a third more hugging, more kissing, more outcri
es, and tears of joy. He could not distinguish which was Papa, which Natasha, and
 which Petya. Everyone shouted, talked, and kissed him at the same time. Only his
 mother was not there, he noticed that.  "And I did not know... Nicholas... My da
rling!..."  "Here he is... our own... Kolya, * dear fellow... How he has changed!
... Where are the candles?... Tea!..."       * Nicholas.   "And me, kiss me!"  "D
earest... and me!"  Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old co
unt were all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the room, ex
claiming and ohing and ahing.  Petya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, "And m
e too!"  Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his face w
ith kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang away and pranced u
p and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly.  All around were lov
ing eyes glistening with tears of joy, and all around were lips seeking a kiss.  
Sonya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss, looked eagerly
 toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which she longed. Sonya now was sixtee
n and she was very pretty, especially at this moment of happy, rapturous exciteme
nt. She gazed at him, not taking her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her br
eath. He gave her a grateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someon
e. The old countess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, steps
 so rapid that they could hardly be his mother's.  Yet it was she, dressed in a n
ew gown which he did not know, made since he had left. All the others let him go,
 and he ran to her. When they met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not
 lift her face, but only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar's jacket. 
Denisov, who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wiped hi
s eyes at the sight.  "Vasili Denisov, your son's friend," he said, introducing h
imself to the count, who was looking inquiringly at him.  "You are most welcome! 
I know, I know," said the count, kissing and embracing Denisov. "Nicholas wrote u
s... Natasha, Vera, look! Here is Denisov!"  The same happy, rapturous faces turn
ed to the shaggy figure of Denisov.  "Darling Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside 
herself with rapture, springing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing h
im. This escapade made everybody feel confused. Denisov blushed too, but smiled a
nd, taking Natasha's hand, kissed it.  Denisov was shown to the room prepared for
 him, and the Rostovs all gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room.  The old c
ountess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it every moment, sat beside him t
he rest, crowding round him, watched every movement, word, or look of his, never 
taking their blissfully adoring eyes off him. His brother and sisters struggled f
or the places nearest to him and disputed with one another who should bring him h
is tea, handkerchief, and pipe.  Rostov was very happy in the love they showed hi
m but the first moment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seeme
d insufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.  Next mo
rning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelers slept till ten o'clock.
  In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers, satchels, sabre
taches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshly cleaned pairs with spurs 
had just been placed by the wall. The servants were bringing in jugs and basins, 
hot water for shaving, and their wellbrushed clothes. There was a masculine odor 
and a smell of tobacco.  "Hallo, Gwiskamy pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voic
e. "Wostov, get up!"  Rostov, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together, raised
 his disheveled head from the hot pillow.  "Why, is it late?"  "Late! It's nearly
 ten o'clock," answered Natasha's voice. A rustle of starched petticoats and the 
whispering and laughter of girls' voices came from the adjoining room. The door w
as opened a crack and there was a glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, black ha
ir, and merry faces. It was Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who had come to see whethe
r they were getting up.  "Nicholas! Get up!" Natasha's voice was again heard at t
he door.  "Directly!"  Meanwhile, Petya, having found and seized the sabers in th
e outer room, with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elder brother
, and forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed, opene
d the bedroom door.  "Is this your saber?" he shouted.  The girls sprang aside. D
enisov hid his hairy legs under the blanket, looking with a scared face at his co
mrade for help. The door, having let Petya in, closed again. A sound of laughter 
came from behind it.  "Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!" said Natasha's 
voice.  "Is this your saber?" asked Petya. "Or is it yours?" he said, addressing 
the blackmustached Denisov with servile deference.  Rostov hurriedly put somethin
g on his feet, drew on his dressing gown, and went out. Natasha had put on one sp
urred boot and was just getting her foot into the other. Sonya, when he came in, 
was twirling round and was about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit dow
n. They were dressed alike, in new paleblue frocks, and were both fresh, rosy, an
d bright. Sonya ran away, but Natasha, taking her brother's arm, led him into the
 sitting room, where they began talking. They hardly gave one another time to ask
 questions and give replies concerning a thousand little matters which could not 
interest anyone but themselves. Natasha laughed at every word he said or that she
 said herself, not because what they were saying was amusing, but because she fel
t happy and was unable to control her joy which expressed itself by laughter.  "O
h, how nice, how splendid!" she said to everything.  Rostov felt that, under the 
influence of the warm rays of love, that childlike smile which had not once appea
red on his face since he left home now for the first time after eighteen months a
gain brightened his soul and his face.  "No, but listen," she said, "now you are 
quite a man, aren't you? I'm awfully glad you're my brother." She touched his mus
tache. "I want to know what you men are like. Are you the same as we? No?"  "Why 
did Sonya run away?" asked Rostov.  "Ah, yes! That's a whole long story! How are 
you going to speak to herthou or you?"  "As may happen," said Rostov.  "No, call 
her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some other time. No, I'll tell you no
w. You know Sonya's my dearest friend. Such a friend that I burned my arm for her
 sake. Look here!"  She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on 
her long, slender, delicate arm, high above the elbow on that part that is covere
d even by a ball dress.  "I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a
 ruler in the fire and pressed it there!"  Sitting on the sofa with the little cu
shions on its arms, in what used to be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natas
ha's wildly bright eyes, Rostov reentered that world of home and childhood which 
had no meaning for anyone else, but gave him some of the best joys of his life an
d the burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem to him sense
less, he understood and was not surprised at it.  "Well, and is that all?" he ask
ed.  "We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was just nonsens
e, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does it for life, but I 
don't understand that, I forget quickly."  "Well, what then?"  "Well, she loves m
e and you like that."  Natasha suddenly flushed.  "Why, you remember before you w
ent away?... Well, she says you are to forget all that.... She says 'I shall love
 him always, but let him be free.' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? 
Isn't it?" asked Natasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that wha
t she was now saying she had talked of before, with tears.  Rostov became thought
ful.  "I never go back on my word," he said. "Besides, Sonya is so charming that 
only a fool would renounce such happiness."  "No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I 
have already talked it over. We knew you'd say so. But it won't do, because you s
ee, if you say thatif you consider yourself bound by your promiseit will seem as 
if she had not meant it seriously. It makes it as if you were marrying her becaus
e you must, and that wouldn't do at all."  Rostov saw that it had been well consi
dered by them. Sonya had already struck him by her beauty on the preceding day. T
oday, when he had caught a glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was 
a charming girl of sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him he did not do
ubt that for an instant. Why should he not love her now, and even marry her, Rost
ov thought, but just now there were so many other pleasures and interests before 
him! "Yes, they have taken a wise decision," he thought, "I must remain free."  "
Well then, that's excellent," said he. "We'll talk it over later on. Oh, how glad
 I am to have you!"  "Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued.  "Oh,
 what nonsense!" cried Natasha, laughing. "I don't think about him or anyone else
, and I don't want anything of the kind."  "Dear me! Then what are you up to now?
"  "Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face. "Have you seen Dup
ort?"  "No."  "Not seen Duportthe famous dancer? Well then, you won't understand.
 That's what I'm up to."  Curving her arms, Natasha held out her skirts as dancer
s do, ran back a few steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharply 
together, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.  "See, I'm standing! 
See!" she said, but could not maintain herself on her toes any longer. "So that's
 what I'm up to! I'll never marry anyone, but will be a dancer. Only don't tell a
nyone."  Rostov laughed so loud and merrily that Denisov, in his bedroom, felt en
vious and Natasha could not help joining in.  "No, but don't you think it's nice?
" she kept repeating.  "Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Boris?"  Natasha
 flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tell him so when I see him!" 
 "Dear me!" said Rostov.  "But that's all rubbish," Natasha chattered on. "And is
 Denisov nice?" she asked.  "Yes, indeed!"  "Oh, well then, goodby go and dress. 
Is he very terrible, Denisov?"  "Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vaska is a s
plendid fellow."  "You call him Vaska? That's funny! And is he very nice?"  "Very
."  "Well then, be quick. We'll all have breakfast together."  And Natasha rose a
nd went out of the room on tiptoe, like a ballet dancer, but smiling as only happ
y girls of fifteen can smile. When Rostov met Sonya in the drawing room, he redde
ned. He did not know how to behave with her. The evening before, in the first hap
py moment of meeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could no
t be done he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters, was looking i
nquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave with her. He kissed her
 hand and addressed her not as thou but as youSonya. But their eyes met and said 
thou, and exchanged tender kisses. Her looks asked him to forgive her for having 
dared, by Natasha's intermediacy, to remind him of his promise, and then thanked 
him for his love. His looks thanked her for offering him his freedom and told her
 that one way or another he would never cease to love her, for that would be impo
ssible.  "How strange it is," said Vera, selecting a moment when all were silent,
 "that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet like strangers."  V
era's remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like most of her obser
vations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not only Sonya, Nicholas, and Natas
ha, but even the old countess, whodreading this love affair which might hinder Ni
cholas from making a brilliant matchblushed like a girl.  Denisov, to Rostov's su
rprise, appeared in the drawing room with pomaded hair, perfumed, and in a new un
iform, looking just as smart as he made himself when going into battle, and he wa
s more amiable to the ladies and gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see h
im.      CHAPTER II   On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostov was 
welcomed by his home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and their darling Nikole
nka by his relations as a charming, attractive, and polite young man by his acqua
intances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars, a good dancer, and one of the best 
matches in the city.  The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow. The old count had mon
ey enough that year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas, ac
quiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of the latest cut, suc
h as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of the latest fashion, with extreme
ly pointed toes and small silver spurs, passed his time very gaily. After a short
 period of adapting himself to the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very
 pleasant to be at home again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much
. His despair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money from Gav
ril to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sonya on the slyhe now recalled all this 
as childishness he had left immeasurably behind. Now he was a lieutenant of hussa
rs, in a jacket laced with silver, and wearing the Cross of St. George, awarded t
o soldiers for bravery in action, and in the company of wellknown, elderly, and r
espected racing men was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a lady 
on one of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He led the mazurka at the
 Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski, visited the E
nglish Club, and was on intimate terms with a colonel of forty to whom Denisov ha
d introduced him.  His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But
 still, as he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, he often spok
e about him and about his love for him, letting it be understood that he had not 
told all and that there was something in his feelings for the Emperor not everyon
e could understand, and with his whole soul he shared the adoration then common i
n Moscow for the Emperor, who was spoken of as the "angel incarnate."  During Ros
tov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army, he did not draw closer to 
Sonya, but rather drifted away from her. She was very pretty and sweet, and evide
ntly deeply in love with him, but he was at the period of youth when there seems 
so much to do that there is no time for that sort of thing and a young man fears 
to bind himself and prizes his freedom which he needs for so many other things. W
hen he thought of Sonya, during this stay in Moscow, he said to himself, "Ah, the
re will be, and there are, many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yet know.
 There will be time enough to think about love when I want to, but now I have no 
time." Besides, it seemed to him that the society of women was rather derogatory 
to his manhood. He went to balls and into ladies' society with an affectation of 
doing so against his will. The races, the English Club, sprees with Denisov, and 
visits to a certain housethat was another matter and quite the thing for a dashin
g young hussar!  At the beginning of March, old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy a
rranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club.  The count wa
lked up and down the hall in his dressing gown, giving orders to the club steward
 and to the famous Feoktist, the Club's head cook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbe
rs, strawberries, veal, and fish for this dinner. The count had been a member and
 on the committee of the Club from the day it was founded. To him the Club entrus
ted the arrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration, for few men knew so we
ll how to arrange a feast on an openhanded, hospitable scale, and still fewer men
 would be so well able and willing to make up out of their own resources what mig
ht be needed for the success of the fete. The club cook and the steward listened 
to the count's orders with pleased faces, for they knew that under no other manag
ement could they so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner cos
ting several thousand rubles.  "Well then, mind and have cocks' comb in the turtl
e soup, you know!"  "Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked the cook.  The 
count considered.  "We can't have lessyes, three... the mayonnaise, that's one," 
said he, bending down a finger.  "Then am I to order those large sterlets?" asked
 the steward.  "Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take less. Ah, dear me! I w
as forgetting. We must have another entree. Ah, goodness gracious!" he clutched a
t his head. "Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh, Dmitri! Gallop off t
o our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum who appeared at his call. "Hurry of
f and tell Maksim, the gardener, to set the serfs to work. Say that everything ou
t of the hothouses must be brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two 
hundred pots here on Friday."  Having given several more orders, he was about to 
go to his "little countess" to have a rest, but remembering something else of imp
ortance, he returned again, called back the cook and the club steward, and again 
began giving orders. A light footstep and the clinking of spurs were heard at the
 door, and the young count, handsome, rosy, with a dark little mustache, evidentl
y rested and made sleeker by his easy life in Moscow, entered the room.  "Ah, my 
boy, my head's in a whirl!" said the old man with a smile, as if he felt a little
 confused before his son. "Now, if you would only help a bit! I must have singers
 too. I shall have my own orchestra, but shouldn't we get the gypsy singers as we
ll? You military men like that sort of thing."  "Really, Papa, I believe Prince B
agration worried himself less before the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now,
" said his son with a smile.  The old count pretended to be angry.  "Yes, you tal
k, but try it yourself!"  And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd an
d respectful expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the father and
 son.  "What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktist?" said he. "Lau
ghing at us old fellows!"  "That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to
 eat a good dinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that's not their busi
ness!"  "That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing his son by
 both hands, he cried, "Now I've got you, so take the sleigh and pair at once, an
d go to Bezukhov's, and tell him 'Count Ilya has sent you to ask for strawberries
 and fresh pineapples.' We can't get them from anyone else. He's not there himsel
f, so you'll have to go in and ask the princesses and from there go on to the Ras
gulyaythe coachman Ipatka knowsand look up the gypsy Ilyushka, the one who danced
 at Count Orlov's, you remember, in a white Cossack coat, and bring him along to 
me."  "And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?" asked Nicholas, laughin
g. "Dear, dear!..."  At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the busine
sslike, preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never left her face, Anna Mi
khaylovna entered the hall. Though she came upon the count in his dressing gown e
very day, he invariably became confused and begged her to excuse his costume.  "N
o matter at all, my dear count," she said, meekly closing her eyes. "But I'll go 
to Bezukhov's myself. Pierre has arrived, and now we shall get anything we want f
rom his hothouses. I have to see him in any case. He has forwarded me a letter fr
om Boris. Thank God, Boris is now on the staff."  The count was delighted at Anna
 Mikhaylovna's taking upon herself one of his commissions and ordered the small c
losed carriage for her.  "Tell Bezukhov to come. I'll put his name down. Is his w
ife with him?" he asked.  Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadne
ss was depicted on her face.  "Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she s
aid. "If what we hear is true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a th
ing when we were rejoicing at his happiness! And such a lofty angelic soul as you
ng Bezukhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to give him what consol
ation I can."  "Whwhat is the matter?" asked both the young and old Rostov.  Anna
 Mikhaylovna sighed deeply.  "Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a myste
rious whisper, "has compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him up, inv
ited him to his house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here and that darede
vil after her!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, wishing to show her sympathy for Pierre, b
ut by involuntary intonations and a half smile betraying her sympathy for the "da
redevil," as she called Dolokhov. "They say Pierre is quite broken by his misfort
une."  "Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the Clubit will all blow over. 
It will be a tremendous banquet."  Next day, the third of March, soon after one o
'clock, two hundred and fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were a
waiting the guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince Bagration, t
o dinner.  On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow h
ad been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victories that on 
receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it, while others sough
t some extraordinary explanation of so strange an event. In the English Club, whe
re all who were distinguished, important, and well informed foregathered when the
 news began to arrive in December, nothing was said about the war and the last ba
ttle, as though all were in a conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone in 
conversationCount Rostopchin, Prince Yuri Dolgorukov, Valuev, Count Markov, and P
rince Vyazemskidid not show themselves at the Club, but met in private houses in 
intimate circles, and the Moscovites who took their opinions from othersIlya Rost
ov among themremained for a while without any definite opinion on the subject of 
the war and without leaders. The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and tha
t to discuss the bad news was difficult, and so it was best to be silent. But aft
er a while, just as a jury comes out of its room, the bigwigs who guided the Club
's opinion reappeared, and everybody began speaking clearly and definitely. Reaso
ns were found for the incredible, unheardof, and impossible event of a Russian de
feat, everything became clear, and in all corners of Moscow the same things began
 to be said. These reasons were the treachery of the Austrians, a defective commi
ssariat, the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Langeron, K
utuzov's incapacity, and it was whispered the youth and inexperience of the sover
eign, who had trusted worthless and insignificant people. But the army, the Russi
an army, everyone declared, was extraordinary and had achieved miracles of valor.
 The soldiers, officers, and generals were heroes. But the hero of heroes was Pri
nce Bagration, distinguished by his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat from 
Austerlitz, where he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all day beat
en back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own. What also conduced to Bagrat
ion's being selected as Moscow's hero was the fact that he had no connections in 
the city and was a stranger there. In his person, honor was shown to a simple fig
hting Russian soldier without connections and intrigues, and to one who was assoc
iated by memories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov. Moreover, pay
ing such honor to Bagration was the best way of expressing disapproval and dislik
e of Kutuzov.  "Had there been no Bagration, it would have been necessary to inve
nt him," said the wit Shinshin, parodying the words of Voltaire. Kutuzov no one s
poke of, except some who abused him in whispers, calling him a court weathercock 
and an old satyr.  All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov's saying "If you go on m
odeling and modeling you must get smeared with clay," suggesting consolation for 
our defeat by the memory of former victories and the words of Rostopchin, that Fr
ench soldiers have to be incited to battle by highfalutin words, and Germans by l
ogical arguments to show them that it is more dangerous to run away than to advan
ce, but that Russian soldiers only need to be restrained and held back! On all si
des, new and fresh anecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown b
y our officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another had kille
d five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded. Berg was mentioned
, by those who did not know him, as having, when wounded in the right hand, taken
 his sword in the left, and gone forward. Of Bolkonski, nothing was said, and onl
y those who knew him intimately regretted that he had died so young, leaving a pr
egnant wife with his eccentric father.      CHAPTER III   On that third of March,
 all the rooms in the English Club were filled with a hum of conversation, like t
he hum of bees swarming in springtime. The members and guests of the Club wandere
d hither and thither, sat, stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some in
 evening dress, and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftan
s. Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings, stood at e
very door anxiously noting visitors' every movement in order to offer their servi
ces. Most of those present were elderly, respected men with broad, selfconfident 
faces, fat fingers, and resolute gestures and voices. This class of guests and me
mbers sat in certain habitual places and met in certain habitual groups. A minori
ty of those present were casual guestschiefly young men, among whom were Denisov,
 Rostov, and Dolokhovwho was now again an officer in the Semenov regiment. The fa
ces of these young people, especially those who were military men, bore that expr
ession of condescending respect for their elders which seems to say to the older 
generation, "We are prepared to respect and honor you, but all the same remember 
that the future belongs to us."  Nesvitski was there as an old member of the Club
. Pierre, who at his wife's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spect
acles, went about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. Here, a
s elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to his wealth, an
d being in the habit of lording it over these people, he treated them with absent
minded contempt.  By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by h
is wealth and connections he belonged to the groups old and honored guests, and s
o he went from one group to another. Some of the most important old men were the 
center of groups which even strangers approached respectfully to hear the voices 
of wellknown men. The largest circles formed round Count Rostopchin, Valuev, and 
Naryshkin. Rostopchin was describing how the Russians had been overwhelmed by fly
ing Austrians and had had to force their way through them with bayonets.  Valuev 
was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent from Petersburg to ascertain
 what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.  In the third circle, Naryshkin was s
peaking of the meeting of the Austrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed lik
e a cock in reply to the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshin, stan
ding close by, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutuzov had evidently failed to 
learn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like a cock, but 
the elder members glanced severely at the wit, making him feel that in that place
 and on that day, it was improper to speak so of Kutuzov.  Count Ilya Rostov, hur
ried and preoccupied, went about in his soft boots between the dining and drawing
 rooms, hastily greeting the important and unimportant, all of whom he knew, as i
f they were all equals, while his eyes occasionally sought out his fine wellsetup
 young son, resting on him and winking joyfully at him. Young Rostov stood at a w
indow with Dolokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately made and highly valued. The
 old count came up to them and pressed Dolokhov's hand.  "Please come and visit u
s... you know my brave boy... been together out there... both playing the hero...
 Ah, Vasili Ignatovich... How d'ye do, old fellow?" he said, turning to an old ma
n who was passing, but before he had finished his greeting there was a general st
ir, and a footman who had run in announced, with a frightened face "He's arrived!
"  Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, andlike rye shaken together in a shov
elthe guests who had been scattered about in different rooms came together and cr
owded in the large drawing room by the door of the ballroom.  Bagration appeared 
in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword, which, in accord with the Cl
ub custom, he had given up to the hall porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head
, nor had he a loaded whip over his shoulder, as when Rostov had seen him on the 
eve of the battle of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and fo
reign Orders, and the Star of St. George on his left breast. Evidently just befor
e coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed, which changed hi
s appearance for the worse. There was something naively festive in his air, which
, in conjunction with his firm and virile features, gave him a rather comical exp
ression. Bekleshev and Theodore Uvarov, who had arrived with him, paused at the d
oorway to allow him, as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagration was embarra
ssed, not wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delay 
at the doors, but after all he did at last enter first. He walked shyly and awkwa
rdly over the parquet floor of the reception room, not knowing what to do with hi
s hands he was more accustomed to walk over a plowed field under fire, as he had 
done at the head of the Kursk regiment at Schon Grabernand he would have found th
at easier. The committeemen met him at the first door and, expressing their delig
ht at seeing such a highly honored guest, took possession of him as it were, with
out waiting for his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It wa
s at first impossible to enter the drawingroom door for the crowd of members and 
guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at Bagration over each 
other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal. Count Ilya Rostov, laughing an
d repeating the words, "Make way, dear boy! Make way, make way!" pushed through t
he crowd more energetically than anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, an
d seated them on the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members of the 
Club, beset the new arrivals. Count Ilya, again thrusting his way through the cro
wd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later with another commi
tteeman, carrying a large silver salver which he presented to Prince Bagration. O
n the salver lay some verses composed and printed in the hero's honor. Bagration,
 on seeing the salver, glanced around in dismay, as though seeking help. But all 
eyes demanded that he should submit. Feeling himself in their power, he resolutel
y took the salver with both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the cou
nt who had presented it to him. Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration o
r he would, it seemed, have held it till evening and have gone in to dinner with 
it and drew his attention to the verses.  "Well, I will read them, then!" Bagrati
on seemed to say, and, fixing his weary eyes on the paper, began to read them wit
h a fixed and serious expression. But the author himself took the verses and bega
n reading them aloud. Bagration bowed his head and listened     Bring glory then 
to Alexander's reign    And on the throne our Titus shield.    A dreaded foe be t
hou, kindhearted as a man,    A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field!    E'en 
fortunate Napoleon    Knows by experience, now, Bagration,    And dare not Hercul
ean Russians trouble...  But before he had finished reading, a stentorian majordo
mo announced that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room cam
e the resounding strains of the polonaise     Conquest's joyful thunder waken,   
 Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...  and Count Rostov, glancing angrily at the au
thor who went on reading his verses, bowed to Bagration. Everyone rose, feeling t
hat dinner was more important than verses, and Bagration, again preceding all the
 rest, went in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between two Alexand
ersBekleshev and Naryshkinwhich was a significant allusion to the name of the sov
ereign. Three hundred persons took their seats in the dining room, according to t
heir rank and importance the more important nearer to the honored guest, as natur
ally as water flows deepest where the land lies lowest.  Just before dinner, Coun
t Ilya Rostov presented his son to Bagration, who recognized him and said a few w
ords to him, disjointed and awkward, as were all the words he spoke that day, and
 Count Ilya looked joyfully and proudly around while Bagration spoke to his son. 
 Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov, sat almost at 
the middle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre, beside Prince Nesvitski. Count I
lya Rostov with the other members of the committee sat facing Bagration and, as t
he very personification of Moscow hospitality, did the honors to the prince.  His
 efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten and the other fare, wa
s splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till the end of the meal. He wink
ed at the butler, whispered directions to the footmen, and awaited each expected 
dish with some anxiety. Everything was excellent. With the second course, a gigan
tic sterlet at sight of which Ilya Rostov blushed with selfconscious pleasure, th
e footmen began popping corks and filling the champagne glasses. After the fish, 
which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with the other commit
teemen. "There will be many toasts, it's time to begin," he whispered, and taking
 up his glass, he rose. All were silent, waiting for what he would say.  "To the 
health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he cried, and at the same moment his kindl
y eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm. The band immediately struck u
p "Conquest's joyful thunder waken..." All rose and cried "Hurrah!" Bagration als
o rose and shouted "Hurrah!" in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted it
 on the field at Schon Grabern. Young Rostov's ecstatic voice could be heard abov
e the three hundred others. He nearly wept. "To the health of our Sovereign, the 
Emperor!" he roared, "Hurrah!" and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to
 the floor. Many followed his example, and the loud shouting continued for a long
 time. When the voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the broken glass and ev
erybody sat down again, smiling at the noise they had made and exchanging remarks
. The old count rose once more, glanced at a note lying beside his plate, and pro
posed a toast, "To the health of the hero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivan
ovich Bagration!" and again his blue eyes grew moist. "Hurrah!" cried the three h
undred voices again, but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata comp
osed by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov     Russians! O'er all barriers on!    Courage con
quest guarantees    Have we not Bagration?    He brings foe men to their knees,..
. etc.   As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was proposed 
and Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved, more glass was smashed, and the
 shouting grew louder. They drank to Bekleshev, Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolgorukov, Ap
raksin, Valuev, to the committee, to all the Club members and to all the Club gue
sts, and finally to Count Ilya Rostov separately, as the organizer of the banquet
. At that toast, the count took out his handkerchief and, covering his face, wept
 outright.      CHAPTER IV   Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. As
 usual, he ate and drank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately not
iced that some great change had come over him that day. He was silent all through
 dinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixed eyes and a look o
f complete absentmindedness, kept rubbing the bridge of his nose. His face was de
pressed and gloomy. He seemed to see and hear nothing of what was going on around
 him and to be absorbed by some depressing and unsolved problem.  The unsolved pr
oblem that tormented him was caused by hints given by the princess, his cousin, a
t Moscow, concerning Dolokhov's intimacy with his wife, and by an anonymous lette
r he had received that morning, which in the mean jocular way common to anonymous
 letters said that he saw badly through his spectacles, but that his wife's conne
ction with Dolokhov was a secret to no one but himself. Pierre absolutely disbeli
eved both the princess' hints and the letter, but he feared now to look at Dolokh
ov, who was sitting opposite him. Every time he chanced to meet Dolokhov's handso
me insolent eyes, Pierre felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul
 and turned quickly away. Involuntarily recalling his wife's past and her relatio
ns with Dolokhov, Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the letter might be tr
ue, or might at least seem to be true had it not referred to his wife. He involun
tarily remembered how Dolokhov, who had fully recovered his former position after
 the campaign, had returned to Petersburg and come to him. Availing himself of hi
s friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion, Dolokhov had come straight 
to his house, and Pierre had put him up and lent him money. Pierre recalled how H
elene had smilingly expressed disapproval of Dolokhov's living at their house, an
d how cynically Dolokhov had praised his wife's beauty to him and from that time 
till they came to Moscow had not left them for a day.  "Yes, he is very handsome,
" thought Pierre, "and I know him. It would be particularly pleasant to him to di
shonor my name and ridicule me, just because I have exerted myself on his behalf,
 befriended him, and helped him. I know and understand what a spice that would ad
d to the pleasure of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true, 
but I do not believe it. I have no right to, and can't, believe it." He remembere
d the expression Dolokhov's face assumed in his moments of cruelty, as when tying
 the policeman to the bear and dropping them into the water, or when he challenge
d a man to a duel without any reason, or shot a postboy's horse with a pistol. Th
at expression was often on Dolokhov's face when looking at him. "Yes, he is a bul
ly," thought Pierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him. It must seem to him tha
t everyone is afraid of him, and that must please him. He must think that I, too,
 am afraid of himand in fact I am afraid of him," he thought, and again he felt s
omething terrible and monstrous rising in his soul. Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov
 were now sitting opposite Pierre and seemed very gay. Rostov was talking merrily
 to his two friends, one of whom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious d
uelist and rake, and every now and then he glanced ironically at Pierre, whose pr
eoccupied, absentminded, and massive figure was a very noticeable one at the dinn
er. Rostov looked inimically at Pierre, first because Pierre appeared to his huss
ar eyes as a rich civilian, the husband of a beauty, and in a wordan old woman an
d secondly because Pierre in his preoccupation and absentmindedness had not recog
nized Rostov and had not responded to his greeting. When the Emperor's health was
 drunk, Pierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his glass.  "What are you a
bout?" shouted Rostov, looking at him in an ecstasy of exasperation. "Don't you h
ear it's His Majesty the Emperor's health?"  Pierre sighed, rose submissively, em
ptied his glass, and, waiting till all were seated again, turned with his kindly 
smile to Rostov.  "Why, I didn't recognize you!" he said. But Rostov was otherwis
e engaged he was shouting "Hurrah!"  "Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" said
 Dolokhov to Rostov.  "Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rostov.  "One should make
 up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.  Pierre did not catch what th
ey were saying, but knew they were talking about him. He reddened and turned away
.  "Well, now to the health of handsome women!" said Dolokhov, and with a serious
 expression, but with a smile lurking at the corners of his mouth, he turned with
 his glass to Pierre.  "Here's to the health of lovely women, Peterkinand their l
overs!" he added.  Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without loo
king at Dolokhov or answering him. The footman, who was distributing leaflets wit
h Kutuzov's cantata, laid one before Pierre as one of the principal guests. He wa
s just going to take it when Dolokhov, leaning across, snatched it from his hand 
and began reading it. Pierre looked at Dolokhov and his eyes dropped, the somethi
ng terrible and monstrous that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and took pos
session of him. He leaned his whole massive body across the table.  "How dare you
 take it?" he shouted.  Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nes
vitski and the neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov.  "Don't
! Don't! What are you about?" whispered their frightened voices.  Dolokhov looked
 at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and that smile of his which seemed t
o say, "Ah! This is what I like!"  "You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.  Pal
e, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy.  "You...! you... scoundrel! I c
hallenge you!" he ejaculated, and, pushing back his chair, he rose from the table
.  At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felt that the 
question of his wife's guilt which had been tormenting him the whole day was fina
lly and indubitably answered in the affirmative. He hated her and was forever sun
dered from her. Despite Denisov's request that he would take no part in the matte
r, Rostov agreed to be Dolokhov's second, and after dinner he discussed the arran
gements for the duel with Nesvitski, Bezukhov's second. Pierre went home, but Ros
tov with Dolokhov and Denisov stayed on at the Club till late, listening to the g
ypsies and other singers.  "Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki," said Dolokhov
, as he took leave of Rostov in the Club porch.  "And do you feel quite calm?" Ro
stov asked.  Dolokhov paused.  "Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret of 
dueling in two words. If you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and w
rite affectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may be killed, yo
u are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with the firm intention of killing 
your man as quickly and surely as possible, and then all will be right, as our be
ar huntsman at Kostroma used to tell me. 'Everyone fears a bear,' he says, 'but w
hen you see one your fear's all gone, and your only thought is not to let him get
 away!' And that's how it is with me. A demain, mon cher." *       * Till tomorro
w, my dear fellow.   Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre and Nesvitski drov
e to the Sokolniki forest and found Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov already there. 
Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had no connecti
on with the matter in hand. His haggard face was yellow. He had evidently not sle
pt that night. He looked about distractedly and screwed up his eyes as if dazzled
 by the sun. He was entirely absorbed by two considerations his wife's guilt, of 
which after his sleepless night he had not the slightest doubt, and the guiltless
ness of Dolokhov, who had no reason to preserve the honor of a man who was nothin
g to him.... "I should perhaps have done the same thing in his place," thought Pi
erre. "It's even certain that I should have done the same, then why this duel, th
is murder? Either I shall kill him, or he will hit me in the head, or elbow, or k
nee. Can't I go away from here, run away, bury myself somewhere?" passed through 
his mind. But just at moments when such thoughts occurred to him, he would ask in
 a particularly calm and absentminded way, which inspired the respect of the onlo
okers, "Will it be long? Are things ready?"  When all was ready, the sabers stuck
 in the snow to mark the barriers, and the pistols loaded, Nesvitski went up to P
ierre.  "I should not be doing my duty, Count," he said in timid tones, "and shou
ld not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me in choosing me for 
your second, if at this grave, this very grave, moment I did not tell you the who
le truth. I think there is no sufficient ground for this affair, or for blood to 
be shed over it.... You were not right, not quite in the right, you were impetuou
s..."  "Oh yes, it is horribly stupid," said Pierre.  "Then allow me to express y
our regrets, and I am sure your opponent will accept them," said Nesvitski who li
ke the others concerned in the affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did no
t yet believe that the affair had come to an actual duel. "You know, Count, it is
 much more honorable to admit one's mistake than to let matters become irreparabl
e. There was no insult on either side. Allow me to convey...."  "No! What is ther
e to talk about?" said Pierre. "It's all the same.... Is everything ready?" he ad
ded. "Only tell me where to go and where to shoot," he said with an unnaturally g
entle smile.  He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working o
f the trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his handa fact that he did n
ot wish to confess.  "Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," said he.  "No ap
ologies, none whatever," said Dolokhov to Denisov who on his side had been attemp
ting a reconciliation, and he also went up to the appointed place.  The spot chos
en for the duel was some eighty paces from the road, where the sleighs had been l
eft, in a small clearing in the pine forest covered with melting snow, the frost 
having begun to break up during the last few days. The antagonists stood forty pa
ces apart at the farther edge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces, 
left tracks in the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing a
nd Nesvitski's and Dolokhov's sabers, which were stuck into the ground ten paces 
apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and misty at forty paces' distance noth
ing could be seen. For three minutes all had been ready, but they still delayed a
nd all were silent.      CHAPTER V   "Well begin!" said Dolokhov.  "All right," s
aid Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling of dread was in the air. It 
was evident that the affair so lightly begun could no longer be averted but was t
aking its course independently of men's will.  Denisov first went to the barrier 
and announced "As the adve'sawies have wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. 
Take your pistols, and at the word thwee begin to advance.  "One! Two! Thwee!" he
 shouted angrily and stepped aside.  The combatants advanced along the trodden tr
acks, nearer and nearer to one another, beginning to see one another through the 
mist. They had the right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. 
Dolokhov walked slowly without raising his pistol, looking intently with his brig
ht, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist's face. His mouth wore its usual semb
lance of a smile.  "So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and at the word "thr
ee," he went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and stepping into the deep
 snow. He held the pistol in his right hand at arm's length, apparently afraid of
 shooting himself with it. His left hand he held carefully back, because he wishe
d to support his right hand with it and knew he must not do so. Having advanced s
ix paces and strayed off the track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet,
 then quickly glanced at Dolokhov and, bending his finger as he had been shown, f
ired. Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shuddered at the sound and th
en, smiling at his own sensations, stood still. The smoke, rendered denser by the
 mist, prevented him from seeing anything for an instant, but there was no second
 report as he had expected. He only heard Dolokhov's hurried steps, and his figur
e came in view through the smoke. He was pressing one hand to his left side, whil
e the other clutched his drooping pistol. His face was pale. Rostov ran toward hi
m and said something.  "Nooo!" muttered Dolokhov through his teeth, "no, it's not
 over." And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the saber, he sank
 on the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody he wiped it on his coat and supp
orted himself with it. His frowning face was pallid and quivered.  "Plea..." bega
n Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word.  "Please," he uttered with
 an effort.  Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dolokhov a
nd was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dolokhov cried  "To yo
ur barrier!" and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped by his saber. Only ten 
paces divided them. Dolokhov lowered his head to the snow, greedily bit at it, ag
ain raised his head, adjusted himself, drew in his legs and sat up, seeking a fir
m center of gravity. He sucked and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but
 his eyes, still smiling, glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered h
is remaining strength. He raised his pistol and aimed.  "Sideways! Cover yourself
 with your pistol!" ejaculated Nesvitski.  "Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried t
o his adversary.  Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and l
egs helplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facing Dolokhov lo
oked sorrowfully at him. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitski closed their eyes. At the
 same instant they heard a report and Dolokhov's angry cry.  "Missed!" shouted Do
lokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards on the snow.  Pierre clutched his t
emples, and turning round went into the forest, trampling through the deep snow, 
and muttering incoherent words  "Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, p
uckering his face.  Nesvitski stopped him and took him home.  Rostov and Denisov 
drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.  The latter lay silent in the sleigh with c
losed eyes and did not answer a word to the questions addressed to him. But on en
tering Moscow he suddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort, took Rost
ov, who was sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostov was struck by the totally alt
ered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov's face.  "Well?
 How do you feel?" he asked.  "Bad! But it's not that, my friend" said Dolokhov w
ith a gasping voice. "Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I have
 killed her, killed... She won't get over it! She won't survive...."  "Who?" aske
d Rostov.  "My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother," and Dolokhov
 pressed Rostov's hand and burst into tears.  When he had become a little quieter
, he explained to Rostov that he was living with his mother, who, if she saw him 
dying, would not survive it. He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her.  Rostov
 went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his great surprise learned that Dolok
hov the brawler, Dolokhov the bully, lived in Moscow with an old mother and a hun
chback sister, and was the most affectionate of sons and brothers.      CHAPTER V
I   Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and in Mosc
ow their house was always full of visitors. The night after the duel he did not g
o to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in his father's room, that huge r
oom in which Count Bezukhov had died.  He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall as
leep and forget all that had happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm o
f feelings, thoughts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fa
ll asleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pace the room wit
h rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the early days of their marriage, with
 bare shoulders and a languid, passionate look on her face, and then immediately 
he saw beside her Dolokhov's handsome, insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had
 seen it at the banquet, and then that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, 
as it had been when he reeled and sank on the snow.  "What has happened?" he aske
d himself. "I have killed her lover, yes, killed my wife's lover. Yes, that was i
t! And why? How did I come to do it?""Because you married her," answered an inner
 voice.  "But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marrying her without loving 
her in deceiving yourself and her." And he vividly recalled that moment after sup
per at Prince Vasili's, when he spoke those words he had found so difficult to ut
ter "I love you." "It all comes from that! Even then I felt it," he thought. "I f
elt then that it was not so, that I had no right to do it. And so it turns out." 
 He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection. Particularly vivid,
 humiliating, and shameful was the recollection of how one day soon after his mar
riage he came out of the bedroom into his study a little before noon in his silk 
dressing gown and found his head steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked 
into his face and at his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing resp
ectful understanding of his employer's happiness.  "But how often I have felt pro
ud of her, proud of her majestic beauty and social tact," thought he "been proud 
of my house, in which she received all Petersburg, proud of her unapproachability
 and beauty. So this is what I was proud of! I then thought that I did not unders
tand her. How often when considering her character I have told myself that I was 
to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding that constant composure
 and complacency and lack of all interests or desires, and the whole secret lies 
in the terrible truth that she is a depraved woman. Now I have spoken that terrib
le word to myself all has become clear.  "Anatole used to come to borrow money fr
om her and used to kiss her naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but 
let herself be kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and she re
plied with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous 'Let him do w
hat he pleases,' she used to say of me. One day I asked her if she felt any sympt
oms of pregnancy. She laughed contemptuously and said she was not a fool to want 
to have children, and that she was not going to have any children by me."  Then h
e recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and the vulgarity of the 
expressions that were natural to her, though she had been brought up in the most 
aristocratic circles.  "I'm not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allezvous 
promener," * she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with young and old
 men and women Pierre could not understand why he did not love her.       * "You 
clear out of this."   "Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself "I knew she wa
s a depraved woman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself. And now ther
e's Dolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dying, while mee
ting my remorse with some forced bravado!"  Pierre was one of those people who, i
n spite of an appearance of what is called weak character, do not seek a confidan
t in their troubles. He digested his sufferings alone.  "It is all, all her fault
," he said to himself "but what of that? Why did I bind myself to her? Why did I 
say 'Je vous aime' * to her, which was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty a
nd must endure... what? A slur on my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that's nons
ense," he thought. "The slur on my name and honorthat's all apart from myself."  
     * I love you.   "Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorabl
e and a criminal," came into Pierre's head, "and from their point of view they we
re right, as were those too who canonized him and died a martyr's death for his s
ake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a despot. Who is right and who is wr
ong? No one! But if you are alivelive tomorrow you'll die as I might have died an
 hour ago. And is it worth tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life
 in comparison with eternity?"  But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed
 by such reflections, she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments w
hen he had most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt the bl
ood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and break and tear w
hatever came to his hand. "Why did I tell her that 'Je vous aime'?" he kept repea
ting to himself. And when he had said it for the tenth time, Molibre's words "Mai
s que diable alloitil faire dans cette galere?" occurred to him, and he began to 
laugh at himself.  In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go
 to Petersburg. He could not imagine how he could speak to her now. He resolved t
o go away next day and leave a letter informing her of his intention to part from
 her forever.  Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee, Pi
erre was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.  He woke up a
nd looked round for a while with a startled expression, unable to realize where h
e was.  "The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home," sa
id the valet.  But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, the coun
tess herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and with simp
ly dressed hair two immense plaits twice round her lovely head like a coronet ent
ered the room, calm and majestic, except that there was a wrathful wrinkle on her
 rather prominent marble brow. With her imperturbable calm she did not begin to s
peak in front of the valet. She knew of the duel and had come to speak about it. 
She waited till the valet had set down the coffee things and left the room. Pierr
e looked at her timidly over his spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by hounds
 who lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before her enemies, he
 tried to continue reading. But feeling this to be senseless and impossible, he a
gain glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down but looked at him with a contem
ptuous smile, waiting for the valet to go.  "Well, what's this now? What have you
 been up to now, I should like to know?" she asked sternly.  "I? What have I...?"
 stammered Pierre.  "So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel 
about? What is it meant to prove? What? I ask you."  Pierre turned over heavily o
n the ottoman and opened his mouth, but could not reply.  "If you won't answer, I
'll tell you..." Helene went on. "You believe everything you're told. You were to
ld..." Helene laughed, "that Dolokhov was my lover," she said in French with her 
coarse plainness of speech, uttering the word amant as casually as any other word
, "and you believed it! Well, what have you proved? What does this duel prove? Th
at you're a fool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knew that. What will be the
 result? That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow, that everyone will say 
that you, drunk and not knowing what you were about, challenged a man you are jea
lous of without cause." Helene raised her voice and became more and more excited,
 "A man who's a better man than you in every way..."  "Hm... Hm...!" growled Pier
re, frowning without looking at her, and not moving a muscle.  "And how could you
 believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like his company? If you were cleverer a
nd more agreeable, I should prefer yours."  "Don't speak to me... I beg you," mut
tered Pierre hoarsely.  "Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell
 you plainly that there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would no
t have taken lovers des amants, but I have not done so," said she.  Pierre wished
 to say something, looked at her with eyes whose strange expression she did not u
nderstand, and lay down again. He was suffering physically at that moment, there 
was a weight on his chest and he could not breathe. He knew that he must do somet
hing to put an end to this suffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible. 
 "We had better separate," he muttered in a broken voice.  "Separate? Very well, 
but only if you give me a fortune," said Helene. "Separate! That's a thing to fri
ghten me with!"  Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her.
  "I'll kill you!" he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a table with a stren
gth he had never before felt, he made a step toward her brandishing the slab.  He
lene's face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. His father's nature s
howed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and delight of frenzy. He flung d
own the slab, broke it, and swooping down on her with outstretched hands shouted,
 "Get out!" in such a terrible voice that the whole house heard it with horror. G
od knows what he would have done at that moment had Helene not fled from the room
.   A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates in Gr
eat Russia, which formed the larger part of his property, and left for Petersburg
 alone.      CHAPTER VII   Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of
 Austerlitz and the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of
 the letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body had not
 been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What was worst of all for his re
lations was the fact that there was still a possibility of his having been picked
 up on the battlefield by the people of the place and that he might now be lying,
 recovering or dying, alone among strangers and unable to send news of himself. T
he gazettes from which the old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz sta
ted, as usual very briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engagements the Russ
ians had had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order. The old p
rince understood from this official report that our army had been defeated. A wee
k after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitz came a letter from Kutuzov
 informing the prince of the fate that had befallen his son.  "Your son," wrote K
utuzov, "fell before my eyes, a standard in his hand and at the head of a regimen
the fell as a hero, worthy of his father and his fatherland. To the great regret 
of myself and of the whole army it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not.
 I comfort myself and you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise he 
would have been mentioned among the officers found on the field of battle, a list
 of whom has been sent me under flag of truce."  After receiving this news late i
n the evening, when he was alone in his study, the old prince went for his walk a
s usual next morning, but he was silent with his steward, the gardener, and the a
rchitect, and though he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.  When Princes
s Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at his lathe and, as usual, d
id not look round at her.  "Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural 
voice, throwing down his chisel. The wheel continued to revolve by its own impetu
s, and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that wheel, which merged 
in her memory with what followed.  She approached him, saw his face, and somethin
g gave way within her. Her eyes grew dim. By the expression of her father's face,
 not sad, not crushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hanging ov
er her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, the worst in life, on
e she had not yet experienced, irreparable and incomprehensiblethe death of one s
he loved.  "Father! Andrew!"said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such an in
describable charm of sorrow and selfforgetfulness that her father could not bear 
her look but turned away with a sob.  "Bad news! He's not among the prisoners nor
 among the killed! Kutuzov writes..." and he screamed as piercingly as if he wish
ed to drive the princess away by that scream... "Killed!"  The princess did not f
all down or faint. She was already pale, but on hearing these words her face chan
ged and something brightened in her beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joya su
preme joy apart from the joys and sorrows of this worldoverflowed the great grief
 within her. She forgot all fear of her father, went up to him, took his hand, an
d drawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck.  "Father," she said,
 "do not turn away from me, let us weep together."  "Scoundrels! Blackguards!" sh
rieked the old man, turning his face away from her. "Destroying the army, destroy
ing the men! And why? Go, go and tell Lise."  The princess sank helplessly into a
n armchair beside her father and wept. She saw her brother now as he had been at 
the moment when he took leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She 
saw him tender and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. "Did he belie
ve? Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There in the realms of ete
rnal peace and blessedness?" she thought.  "Father, tell me how it happened," she
 asked through her tears.  "Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian m
en and Russia's glory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell Lis
e. I will follow."  When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princ
ess sat working and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happy calm p
eculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes did not see Princess Mary
 but were looking within... into herself... at something joyful and mysterious ta
king place within her.  "Mary," she said, moving away from the embroidery frame a
nd lying back, "give me your hand." She took her sisterinlaw's hand and held it b
elow her waist.  Her eyes were smiling expectantly, her downy lip rose and remain
ed lifted in childlike happiness.  Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid he
r face in the folds of her sisterinlaw's dress.  "There, there! Do you feel it? I
 feel so strange. And do you know, Mary, I am going to love him very much," said 
Lise, looking with bright and happy eyes at her sisterinlaw.  Princess Mary could
 not lift her head, she was weeping.  "What is the matter, Mary?"  "Nothing... on
ly I feel sad... sad about Andrew," she said, wiping away her tears on her sister
inlaw's knee.  Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began try
ing to prepare her sisterinlaw, and every time began to cry. Unobservant as was t
he little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did not understand, agita
ted her. She said nothing but looked about uneasily as if in search of something.
 Before dinner the old prince, of whom she was always afraid, came into her room 
with a peculiarly restless and malign expression and went out again without sayin
g a word. She looked at Princess Mary, then sat thinking for a while with that ex
pression of attention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women
, and suddenly began to cry.  "Has anything come from Andrew?" she asked.  "No, y
ou know it's too soon for news. But my father is anxious and I feel afraid."  "So
 there's nothing?"  "Nothing," answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her ra
diant eyes at her sisterinlaw.  She had determined not to tell her and persuaded 
her father to hide the terrible news from her till after her confinement, which w
as expected within a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hid
 their grief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope he made 
up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though he sent an official to
 Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered a monument from Moscow which h
e intended to erect in his own garden to his memory, and he told everybody that h
is son had been killed. He tried not to change his former way of life, but his st
rength failed him. He walked less, ate less, slept less, and became weaker every 
day. Princess Mary hoped. She prayed for her brother as living and was always awa
iting news of his return.      CHAPTER VIII   "Dearest," said the little princess
 after breakfast on the morning of the nineteenth March, and her downy little lip
 rose from old habit, but as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of eve
ry word, and even every footstep in that house since the terrible news had come, 
so now the smile of the little princessinfluenced by the general mood though with
out knowing its causewas such as to remind one still more of the general sorrow. 
 "Dearest, I'm afraid this morning's fruschtique *as Foka the cook calls ithas di
sagreed with me."       * Fruhstuck breakfast.   "What is the matter with you, my
 darling? You look pale. Oh, you are very pale!" said Princess Mary in alarm, run
ning with her soft, ponderous steps up to her sisterinlaw.  "Your excellency, sho
uld not Mary Bogdanovna be sent for?" said one of the maids who was present. Mary
 Bogdanovna was a midwife from the neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills f
or the last fortnight.  "Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps that's it. I'l
l go. Courage, my angel." She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.  "Oh, 
no, no!" And besides the pallor and the physical suffering on the little princess
' face, an expression of childish fear of inevitable pain showed itself.  "No, it
's only indigestion?... Say it's only indigestion, say so, Mary! Say..." And the 
little princess began to cry capriciously like a suffering child and to wring her
 little hands even with some affectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fe
tch Mary Bogdanovna.  "Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.  
The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plump white ha
nds with an air of calm importance.  "Mary Bogdanovna, I think it's beginning!" s
aid Princess Mary looking at the midwife with wideopen eyes of alarm.  "Well, the
 Lord be thanked, Princess," said Mary Bogdanovna, not hastening her steps. "You 
young ladies should not know anything about it."  "But how is it the doctor from 
Moscow is not here yet?" said the princess. In accordance with Lise's and Prince 
Andrew's wishes they had sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expect
ing him at any moment.  "No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed," said Mary Bogdan
ovna. "We'll manage very well without a doctor."  Five minutes later Princess Mar
y from her room heard something heavy being carried by. She looked out. The men s
ervants were carrying the large leather sofa from Prince Andrew's study into the 
bedroom. On their faces was a quiet and solemn look.  Princess Mary sat alone in 
her room listening to the sounds in the house, now and then opening her door when
 someone passed and watching what was going on in the passage. Some women passing
 with quiet steps in and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned aw
ay. She did not venture to ask any questions, and shut the door again, now sittin
g down in her easy chair, now taking her prayer book, now kneeling before the ico
n stand. To her surprise and distress she found that her prayers did not calm her
 excitement. Suddenly her door opened softly and her old nurse, Praskovya Savishn
a, who hardly ever came to that room as the old prince had forbidden it, appeared
 on the threshold with a shawl round her head.  "I've come to sit with you a bit,
 Masha," said the nurse, "and here I've brought the prince's wedding candles to l
ight before his saint, my angel," she said with a sigh.  "Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!
"  "God is merciful, birdie."  The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons an
d sat down by the door with her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and began rea
ding. Only when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, the 
princess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging. Everyone in the house was 
dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experienced as she sat in her ro
om. But owing to the superstition that the fewer the people who know of it the le
ss a woman in travail suffers, everyone tried to pretend not to know no one spoke
 of it, but apart from the ordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in
 the prince's household, a common anxiety, a softening of the heart, and a consci
ousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplished at that moment
 made itself felt.  There was no laughter in the maids' large hall. In the men se
rvants' hall all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs' quarters
 torches and candles were burning and no one slept. The old prince, stepping on h
is heels, paced up and down his study and sent Tikhon to ask Mary Bogdanovna what
 news."Say only that 'the prince told me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer
."  "Inform the prince that labor has begun," said Mary Bogdanovna, giving the me
ssenger a significant look.  Tikhon went and told the prince.  "Very good!" said 
the prince closing the door behind him, and Tikhon did not hear the slightest sou
nd from the study after that.  After a while he reentered it as if to snuff the c
andles, and, seeing the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his 
perturbed face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on the sh
oulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why he had entere
d. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course. Evening passed, nig
ht came, and the feeling of suspense and softening of heart in the presence of th
e unfathomable did not lessen but increased. No one slept.  It was one of those M
arch nights when winter seems to wish to resume its sway and scatters its last sn
ows and storms with desperate fury. A relay of horses had been sent up the highro
ad to meet the German doctor from Moscow who was expected every moment, and men o
n horseback with lanterns were sent to the crossroads to guide him over the count
ry road with its hollows and snowcovered pools of water.  Princess Mary had long 
since put aside her book she sat silent, her luminous eyes fixed on her nurse's w
rinkled face every line of which she knew so well, on the lock of gray hair that 
escaped from under the kerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.  Nu
rse Savishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcely hearing or und
erstanding her own words, what she had told hundreds of times before how the late
 princess had given birth to Princess Mary in Kishenev with only a Moldavian peas
ant woman to help instead of a midwife.  "God is merciful, doctors are never need
ed," she said.  Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of th
e window, from which the double frame had been removed by order of the prince, on
e window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larks returned, and, forci
ng open a loosely closed latch, set the damask curtain flapping and blew out the 
candle with its chill, snowy draft. Princess Mary shuddered her nurse, putting do
wn the stocking she was knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to cat
ch the open casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her loos
e locks of gray hair.  "Princess, my dear, there's someone driving up the avenue!
" she said, holding the casement and not closing it. "With lanterns. Most likely 
the doctor."  "Oh, my God! thank God!" said Princess Mary. "I must go and meet hi
m, he does not know Russian."  Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran 
to meet the newcomer. As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window
 a carriage with lanterns, standing at the entrance. She went out on the stairs. 
On a banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. On the land
ing below, Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and holding another candle. 
Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one could hear the footstep of som
eone in thick felt boots, and a voice that seemed familiar to Princess Mary was s
aying something.  "Thank God!" said the voice. "And Father?"  "Gone to bed," repl
ied the voice of Demyan the house steward, who was downstairs.  Then the voice sa
id something more, Demyan replied, and the steps in the felt boots approached the
 unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly.  "It's Andrew!" thought Princess Mary
. "No it can't be, that would be too extraordinary," and at the very moment she t
hought this, the face and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar
 of which covered with snow, appeared on the landing where the footman stood with
 the candle. Yes, it was he, pale, thin, with a changed and strangely softened bu
t agitated expression on his face. He came up the stairs and embraced his sister.
  "You did not get my letter?" he asked, and not waiting for a replywhich he woul
d not have received, for the princess was unable to speakhe turned back, rapidly 
mounted the stairs again with the doctor who had entered the hall after him they 
had met at the last post station, and again embraced his sister.  "What a strange
 fate, Masha darling!" And having taken off his cloak and felt boots, he went to 
the little princess' apartment.      CHAPTER IX   The little princess lay support
ed by pillows, with a white cap on her head the pains had just left her. Strands 
of her black hair lay round her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy
 mouth with its downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew en
tered and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying. Her g
littering eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, rested on him without 
changing their expression. "I love you all and have done no harm to anyone why mu
st I suffer so? Help me!" her look seemed to say. She saw her husband, but did no
t realize the significance of his appearance before her now. Prince Andrew went r
ound the sofa and kissed her forehead.  "My darling!" he saida word he had never 
used to her before. "God is merciful...."  She looked at him inquiringly and with
 childlike reproach.  "I expected help from you and I get none, none from you eit
her!" said her eyes. She was not surprised at his having come she did not realize
 that he had come. His coming had nothing to do with her sufferings or with their
 relief. The pangs began again and Mary Bogdanovna advised Prince Andrew to leave
 the room.  The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary
, again joined her. They began talking in whispers, but their talk broke off at e
very moment. They waited and listened.  "Go, dear," said Princess Mary.  Prince A
ndrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next to hers. A woman ca
me from the bedroom with a frightened face and became confused when she saw Princ
e Andrew. He covered his face with his hands and remained so for some minutes. Pi
teous, helpless, animal moans came through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went t
o the door, and tried to open it. Someone was holding it shut.  "You can't come i
n! You can't!" said a terrified voice from within.  He began pacing the room. The
 screaming ceased, and a few more seconds went by. Then suddenly a terrible shrie
kit could not be hers, she could not scream like thatcame from the bedroom. Princ
e Andrew ran to the door the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant.  "
What have they taken a baby in there for?" thought Prince Andrew in the first sec
ond. "A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or is the baby born?"  The
n suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail tears choked him, and
 leaning his elbows on the window sill be began to cry, sobbing like a child. The
 door opened. The doctor with his shirt sleeves tucked up, without a coat, pale a
nd with a trembling jaw, came out of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but t
he doctor gave him a bewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman rushed
 out and seeing Prince Andrew stopped, hesitating on the threshold. He went into 
his wife's room. She was lying dead, in the same position he had seen her in five
 minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of the cheeks, the sam
e expression was on her charming childlike face with its upper lip covered with t
iny black hair.  "I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone and what have y
ou done to me?"said her charming, pathetic, dead face.  In a corner of the room s
omething red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed in Mary Bogdanovna's trembling wh
ite hands.   Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his father
's room. The old man already knew everything. He was standing close to the door a
nd as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise round his son's nec
k, and without a word he began to sob like a child.   Three days later the little
 princess was buried, and Prince Andrew went up the steps to where the coffin sto
od, to give her the farewell kiss. And there in the coffin was the same face, tho
ugh with closed eyes. "Ah, what have you done to me?" it still seemed to say, and
 Prince Andrew felt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty of
 a sin he could neither remedy nor forget. He could not weep. The old man too cam
e up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly crossed one on the other 
on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed to say "Ah, what have you done to
 me, and why?" And at the sight the old man turned angrily away.   Another five d
ays passed, and then the young Prince Nicholas Andreevich was baptized. The wet n
urse supported the coverlet with her chin, while the priest with a goose feather 
anointed the boy's little red and wrinkled soles and palms.  His grandfather, who
 was his godfather, trembling and afraid of dropping him, carried the infant roun
d the battered tin font and handed him over to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prin
ce Andrew sat in another room, faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in
 the font, and awaited the termination of the ceremony. He looked up joyfully at 
the baby when the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him t
hat the wax with the baby's hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.      C
HAPTER X   Rostov's share in Dolokhov's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by the e
fforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the ranks as he expecte
d he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general of Moscow. As a result he 
could not go to the country with the rest of the family, but was kept all summer 
in Moscow by his new duties. Dolokhov recovered, and Rostov became very friendly 
with him during his convalescence. Dolokhov lay ill at his mother's who loved him
 passionately and tenderly, and old Mary Ivanovna, who had grown fond of Rostov f
or his friendship to her Fedya, often talked to him about her son.  "Yes, Count,"
 she would say, "he is too noble and puresouled for our present, depraved world. 
No one now loves virtue it seems like a reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count,
 was it right, was it honorable, of Bezukhov? And Fedya, with his noble spirit, l
oved him and even now never says a word against him. Those pranks in Petersburg w
hen they played some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do it together? And there
! Bezukhov got off scotfree, while Fedya had to bear the whole burden on his shou
lders. Fancy what he had to go through! It's true he has been reinstated, but how
 could they fail to do that? I think there were not many such gallant sons of the
 fatherland out there as he. And nowthis duel! Have these people no feeling, or h
onor? Knowing him to be an only son, to challenge him and shoot so straight! It's
 well God had mercy on us. And what was it for? Who doesn't have intrigues nowada
ys? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see things he should have shown it sooner, bu
t he lets it go on for months. And then to call him out, reckoning on Fedya not f
ighting because he owed him money! What baseness! What meanness! I know you under
stand Fedya, my dear count that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few peop
le do understand him. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!"  Dolokhov himself durin
g his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a way no one would have expected of him.  
"I know people consider me a bad man!" he said. "Let them! I don't care a straw a
bout anyone but those I love but those I love, I love so that I would give my lif
e for them, and the others I'd throttle if they stood in my way. I have an adored
, a priceless mother, and two or three friendsyou among themand as for the rest I
 only care about them in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of them a
re harmful, especially the women. Yes, dear boy," he continued, "I have met lovin
g, noble, highminded men, but I have not yet met any womencountesses or cookswho 
were not venal. I have not yet met that divine purity and devotion I look for in 
women. If I found such a one I'd give my life for her! But those!..." and he made
 a gesture of contempt. "And believe me, if I still value my life it is only beca
use I still hope to meet such a divine creature, who will regenerate, purify, and
 elevate me. But you don't understand it."  "Oh, yes, I quite understand," answer
ed Rostov, who was under his new friend's influence.  In the autumn the Rostovs r
eturned to Moscow. Early in the winter Denisov also came back and stayed with the
m. The first half of the winter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow, w
as one of the happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas bro
ught many young men to his parents' house. Vera was a handsome girl of twenty Son
ya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening flower Natasha, half grown 
up and half child, was now childishly amusing, now girlishly enchanting.  At that
 time in the Rostovs' house there prevailed an amorous atmosphere characteristic 
of homes where there are very young and very charming girls. Every young man who 
came to the houseseeing those impressionable, smiling young faces smiling probabl
y at their own happiness, feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fi
tful bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle of young 
girls ready for anything and full of hopeexperienced the same feeling sharing wit
h the young folk of the Rostovs' household a readiness to fall in love and an exp
ectation of happiness.  Among the young men introduced by Rostov one of the first
 was Dolokhov, whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha. She almost quarre
led with her brother about him. She insisted that he was a bad man, and that in t
he duel with Bezukhov, Pierre was right and Dolokhov wrong, and further that he w
as disagreeable and unnatural.  "There's nothing for me to understand," she cried
 out with resolute selfwill, "he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like your 
Denisov though he is a rake and all that, still I like him so you see I do unders
tand. I don't know how to put it... with this one everything is calculated, and I
 don't like that. But Denisov..."  "Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nich
olas, implying that even Denisov was nothing compared to Dolokhov"you must unders
tand what a soul there is in Dolokhov, you should see him with his mother. What a
 heart!"  "Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And do
 you know he has fallen in love with Sonya?"  "What nonsense..."  "I'm certain of
 it you'll see."  Natasha's prediction proved true. Dolokhov, who did not usually
 care for the society of ladies, began to come often to the house, and the questi
on for whose sake he came though no one spoke of it was soon settled. He came bec
ause of Sonya. And Sonya, though she would never have dared to say so, knew it an
d blushed scarlet every time Dolokhov appeared.  Dolokhov often dined at the Rost
ovs', never missed a performance at which they were present, and went to Iogel's 
balls for young people which the Rostovs always attended. He was pointedly attent
ive to Sonya and looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear his
 glances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natasha blushed when the
y saw his looks.  It was evident that this strange, strong man was under the irre
sistible influence of the dark, graceful girl who loved another.  Rostov noticed 
something new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, but he did not explain to himse
lf what these new relations were. "They're always in love with someone," he thoug
ht of Sonya and Natasha. But he was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov a
s before and was less frequently at home.  In the autumn of 1806 everybody had ag
ain begun talking of the war with Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year
 before. Orders were given to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the r
egular army, and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. Everyw
here Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war was tal
ked of. For the Rostov family the whole interest of these preparations for war la
y in the fact that Nicholas would not hear of remaining in Moscow, and only await
ed the termination of Denisov's furlough after Christmas to return with him to th
eir regiment. His approaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself, but 
rather gave zest to his pleasures. He spent the greater part of his time away fro
m home, at dinners, parties, and balls.      CHAPTER XI   On the third day after 
Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing he had rarely done of late. It was a gr
and farewell dinner, as he and Denisov were leaving to join their regiment after 
Epiphany. About twenty people were present, including Dolokhov and Denisov.  Neve
r had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorous atmosphere made its
elf so strongly felt in the Rostovs' house as at this holiday time. "Seize the mo
ments of happiness, love and be loved! That is the only reality in the world, all
 else is folly. It is the one thing we are interested in here," said the spirit o
f the place.  Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, without vi
siting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited, returned h
ome just before dinner. As soon as he entered he noticed and felt the tension of 
the amorous air in the house, and also noticed a curious embarrassment among some
 of those present. Sonya, Dolokhov, and the old countess were especially disturbe
d, and to a lesser degree Natasha. Nicholas understood that something must have h
appened between Sonya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitivene
ss natural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner. On that same
 evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel the dancing master gave for 
his pupils during the holidays.  "Nicholas, will you come to Iogel's? Please do!"
 said Natasha. "He asked you, and Vasili Dmitrich * is also going."       * Denis
ov.   "Where would I not go at the countess' command!" said Denisov, who at the R
ostovs' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha's knight. "I'm even weady to da
nce the pas de chale."  "If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I promised the 
Arkharovs they have a party."  "And you?" he asked Dolokhov, but as soon as he ha
d asked the question he noticed that it should not have been put.  "Perhaps," col
dly and angrily replied Dolokhov, glancing at Sonya, and, scowling, he gave Nicho
las just such a look as he had given Pierre at the Club dinner.  "There is someth
ing up," thought Nicholas, and he was further confirmed in this conclusion by the
 fact that Dolokhov left immediately after dinner. He called Natasha and asked he
r what was the matter.  "And I was looking for you," said Natasha running out to 
him. "I told you, but you would not believe it," she said triumphantly. "He has p
roposed to Sonya!"  Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late, s
omething seemed to give way within him at this news. Dolokhov was a suitable and 
in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. From the point
 of view of the old countess and of society it was out of the question for her to
 refuse him. And therefore Nicholas' first feeling on hearing the news was one of
 anger with Sonya.... He tried to say, "That's capital of course she'll forget he
r childish promises and accept the offer," but before he had time to say it Natas
ha began again.  "And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!" adding, after a p
ause, "she told him she loved another."  "Yes, my Sonya could not have done other
wise!" thought Nicholas.  "Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she
 won't change once she has said..."  "And Mamma pressed her!" said Nicholas repro
achfully.  "Yes," said Natasha. "Do you know, Nicholasdon't be angrybut I know yo
u will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I know for certain that you w
on't marry her."  "Now you don't know that at all!" said Nicholas. "But I must ta
lk to her. What a darling Sonya is!" he added with a smile.  "Ah, she is indeed a
 darling! I'll send her to you."  And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.  A
 minute later Sonya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scared look. Nicholas 
went up to her and kissed her hand. This was the first time since his return that
 they had talked alone and about their love.  "Sophie," he began, timidly at firs
t and then more and more boldly, "if you wish to refuse one who is not only a bri
lliant and advantageous match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend..."
  Sonya interrupted him.  "I have already refused," she said hurriedly.  "If you 
are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I..."  Sonya again interrupted. She ga
ve him an imploring, frightened look.  "Nicholas, don't tell me that!" she said. 
 "No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best to say it. If yo
u refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. I love you, and I th
ink I love you more than anyone else...."  "That is enough for me," said Sonya, b
lushing.  "No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in love ag
ain, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship, confidence, and love 
as I have for you. Then I am young. Mamma does not wish it. In a word, I make no 
promise. And I beg you to consider Dolokhov's offer," he said, articulating his f
riend's name with difficulty.  "Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love you 
as a brother and always shall, and I want nothing more."  "You are an angel I am 
not worthy of you, but I am afraid of misleading you."  And Nicholas again kissed
 her hand.      CHAPTER XII   Iogel's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So
 said the mothers as they watched their young people executing their newly learne
d steps, and so said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they w
ere ready to drop, and so said the grownup young men and women who came to these 
balls with an air of condescension and found them most enjoyable. That year two m
arriages had come of these balls. The two pretty young Princesses Gorchakov met s
uitors there and were married and so further increased the fame of these dances. 
What distinguished them from others was the absence of host or hostess and the pr
esence of the goodnatured Iogel, flying about like a feather and bowing according
 to the rules of his art, as he collected the tickets from all his visitors. Ther
e was the fact that only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves as g
irls of thirteen and fourteen do who are wearing long dresses for the first time.
 With scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed to be, prettyso rapturous 
were their smiles and so sparkling their eyes. Sometimes the best of the pupils, 
of whom Natasha, who was exceptionally graceful, was first, even danced the pas d
e chale, but at this last ball only the ecossaise, the anglaise, and the mazurka,
 which was just coming into fashion, were danced. Iogel had taken a ballroom in B
ezukhov's house, and the ball, as everyone said, was a great success. There were 
many pretty girls and the Rostov girls were among the prettiest. They were both p
articularly happy and gay. That evening, proud of Dolokhov's proposal, her refusa
l, and her explanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirled about before she left home so
 that the maid could hardly get her hair plaited, and she was transparently radia
nt with impulsive joy.  Natasha no less proud of her first long dress and of bein
g at a real ball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with pi
nk ribbons.  Natasha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom. She w
as not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatever person she 
happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.  "Oh, how delightful it
 is!" she kept saying, running up to Sonya.  Nicholas and Denisov were walking up
 and down, looking with kindly patronage at the dancers.  "How sweet she isshe wi
ll be a weal beauty!" said Denisov.  "Who?"  "Countess Natasha," answered Denisov
.  "And how she dances! What gwace!" he said again after a pause.  "Who are you t
alking about?"  "About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.  Rostov smiled. 
 "My dear count, you were one of my best pupilsyou must dance," said little Iogel
 coming up to Nicholas. "Look how many charming young ladies" He turned with the 
same request to Denisov who was also a former pupil of his.  "No, my dear fellow,
 I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov. "Don't you wecollect what bad use I made of
 your lessons?"  "Oh no!" said Iogel, hastening to reassure him. "You were only i
nattentive, but you had talentoh yes, you had talent!"   The band struck up the n
ewly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could not refuse Iogel and asked Sonya to dance
. Denisov sat down by the old ladies and, leaning on his saber and beating time w
ith his foot, told them something funny and kept them amused, while he watched th
e young people dancing, Iogel with Natasha, his pride and his best pupil, were th
e first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his little feet in low shoe
s, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natasha, who, though shy, went on carefu
lly executing her steps. Denisov did not take his eyes off her and beat time with
 his saber in a way that clearly indicated that if he was not dancing it was beca
use he would not and not because he could not. In the middle of a figure he becko
ned to Rostov who was passing  "This is not at all the thing," he said. "What sor
t of Polish mazuwka is this? But she does dance splendidly."  Knowing that Deniso
v had a reputation even in Poland for the masterly way in which he danced the maz
urka, Nicholas ran up to Natasha  "Go and choose Denisov. He is a real dancer, a 
wonder!" he said.  When it came to Natasha's turn to choose a partner, she rose a
nd, tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ran timidly to
 the corner where Denisov sat. She saw that everybody was looking at her and wait
ing. Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusing though he smiled delightedly. He ran 
up to them.  "Please, Vasili Dmitrich," Natasha was saying, "do come!"  "Oh no, l
et me off, Countess," Denisov replied.  "Now then, Vaska," said Nicholas.  "They 
coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokingly.  "I'll sing for you a
 whole evening," said Natasha.  "Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!" sai
d Denisov, and he unhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped
 his partner's hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot, waiting f
or the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka was Denisov's short stature no
t noticeable and he looked the fine fellow he felt himself to be. At the right be
at of the music he looked sideways at his partner with a merry and triumphant air
, suddenly stamped with one foot, bounded from the floor like a ball, and flew ro
und the room taking his partner with him. He glided silently on one foot half acr
oss the room, and seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing straight at them, 
when suddenly, clinking his spurs and spreading out his legs, he stopped short on
 his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot clanking his spurs, whirled ra
pidly round, and, striking his left heel against his right, flew round again in a
 circle. Natasha guessed what he meant to do, and abandoning herself to him follo
wed his lead hardly knowing how. First he spun her round, holding her now with hi
s left, now with his right hand, then falling on one knee he twirled her round hi
m, and again jumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he wo
uld rush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath, and then he sud
denly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps. When at last, smartly 
whirling his partner round in front of her chair, he drew up with a click of his 
spurs and bowed to her, Natasha did not even make him a curtsy. She fixed her eye
s on him in amazement, smiling as if she did not recognize him.  "What does this 
mean?" she brought out.  Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real m
azurka, everyone was delighted with Denisov's skill, he was asked again and again
 as a partner, and the old men began smilingly to talk about Poland and the good 
old days. Denisov, flushed after the mazurka and mopping himself with his handker
chief, sat down by Natasha and did not leave her for the rest of the evening.    
  CHAPTER XIII   For two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own o
r at Dolokhov's home on the third day he received a note from him   As I do not i
ntend to be at your house again for reasons you know of, and am going to rejoin m
y regiment, I am giving a farewell supper tonight to my friendscome to the Englis
h Hotel.   About ten o'clock Rostov went to the English Hotel straight from the t
heater, where he had been with his family and Denisov. He was at once shown to th
e best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evening. Some twenty men were gath
ered round a table at which Dolokhov sat between two candles. On the table was a 
pile of gold and paper money, and he was keeping the bank. Rostov had not seen hi
m since his proposal and Sonya's refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thought of
 how they would meet.  Dolokhov's clear, cold glance met Rostov as soon as he ent
ered the door, as though he had long expected him.  "It's a long time since we me
t," he said. "Thanks for coming. I'll just finish dealing, and then Ilyushka will
 come with his chorus."  "I called once or twice at your house," said Rostov, red
dening.  Dolokhov made no reply.  "You may punt," he said.  Rostov recalled at th
at moment a strange conversation he had once had with Dolokhov. "None but fools t
rust to luck in play," Dolokhov had then said.  "Or are you afraid to play with m
e?" Dolokhov now asked as if guessing Rostov's thought.  Beneath his smile Rostov
 saw in him the mood he had shown at the Club dinner and at other times, when as 
if tired of everyday life he had felt a need to escape from it by some strange, a
nd usually cruel, action.  Rostov felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find
 some joke with which to reply to Dolokhov's words. But before he had thought of 
anything, Dolokhov, looking straight in his face, said slowly and deliberately so
 that everyone could hear  "Do you remember we had a talk about cards... 'He's a 
fool who trusts to luck, one should make certain,' and I want to try."  "To try h
is luck or the certainty?" Rostov asked himself.  "Well, you'd better not play," 
Dolokhov added, and springing a new pack of cards said "Bank, gentlemen!"  Moving
 the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostov sat down by his side and at first 
did not play. Dolokhov kept glancing at him.  "Why don't you play?" he asked.  An
d strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up a card, putting a
 small stake on it, and beginning to play.  "I have no money with me," he said.  
"I'll trust you."  Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked again, an
d again lost. Dolokhov "killed," that is, beat, ten cards of Rostov's running.  "
Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time. "Please place your mo
ney on the cards or I may get muddled in the reckoning."  One of the players said
 he hoped he might be trusted.  "Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the a
ccounts mixed. So I ask you to put the money on your cards," replied Dolokhov. "D
on't stint yourself, we'll settle afterwards," he added, turning to Rostov.  The 
game continued a waiter kept handing round champagne.  All Rostov's cards were be
aten and he had eight hundred rubles scored up against him. He wrote "800 rubles"
 on a card, but while the waiter filled his glass he changed his mind and altered
 it to his usual stake of twenty rubles.  "Leave it," said Dolokhov, though he di
d not seem to be even looking at Rostov, "you'll win it back all the sooner. I lo
se to the others but win from you. Or are you afraid of me?" he asked again.  Ros
tov submitted. He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a seven of hearts wi
th a torn corner, which he had picked up from the floor. He well remembered that 
seven afterwards. He laid down the seven of hearts, on which with a broken bit of
 chalk he had written "800 rubles" in clear upright figures he emptied the glass 
of warm champagne that was handed him, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with a sin
king heart, waiting for a seven to turn up, gazed at Dolokhov's hands which held 
the pack. Much depended on Rostov's winning or losing on that seven of hearts. On
 the previous Sunday the old count had given his son two thousand rubles, and tho
ugh he always disliked speaking of money difficulties had told Nicholas that this
 was all he could let him have till May, and asked him to be more economical this
 time. Nicholas had replied that it would be more than enough for him and that he
 gave his word of honor not to take anything more till the spring. Now only twelv
e hundred rubles was left of that money, so that this seven of hearts meant for h
im not only the loss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the necessity of going back o
n his word. With a sinking heart he watched Dolokhov's hands and thought, "Now th
en, make haste and let me have this card and I'll take my cap and drive home to s
upper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and will certainly never touch a card aga
in." At that moment his home life, jokes with Petya, talks with Sonya, duets with
 Natasha, piquet with his father, and even his comfortable bed in the house on th
e Povarskaya rose before him with such vividness, clearness, and charm that it se
emed as if it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss, long past. He could not co
nceive that a stupid chance, letting the seven be dealt to the right rather than 
to the left, might deprive him of all this happiness, newly appreciated and newly
 illumined, and plunge him into the depths of unknown and undefined misery. That 
could not be, yet he awaited with a sinking heart the movement of Dolokhov's hand
s. Those broad, reddish hands, with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt cuf
fs, laid down the pack and took up a glass and a pipe that were handed him.  "So 
you are not afraid to play with me?" repeated Dolokhov, and as if about to tell a
 good story he put down the cards, leaned back in his chair, and began deliberate
ly with a smile  "Yes, gentlemen, I've been told there's a rumor going about Mosc
ow that I'm a sharper, so I advise you to be careful."  "Come now, deal!" exclaim
ed Rostov.  "Oh, those Moscow gossips!" said Dolokhov, and he took up the cards w
ith a smile.  "Aah!" Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. The s
even he needed was lying uppermost, the first card in the pack. He had lost more 
than he could pay.  "Still, don't ruin yourself!" said Dolokhov with a side glanc
e at Rostov as he continued to deal.      CHAPTER XIV   An hour and a half later 
most of the players were but little interested in their own play.  The whole inte
rest was concentrated on Rostov. Instead of sixteen hundred rubles he had a long 
column of figures scored against him, which he had reckoned up to ten thousand, b
ut that now, as he vaguely supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In real
ity it already exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dolokhov was no longer listening 
to stories or telling them, but followed every movement of Rostov's hands and occ
asionally ran his eyes over the score against him. He had decided to play until t
hat score reached fortythree thousand. He had fixed on that number because fortyt
hree was the sum of his and Sonya's joint ages. Rostov, leaning his head on both 
hands, sat at the table which was scrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wi
ne, and littered with cards. One tormenting impression did not leave him that tho
se broadboned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt sleeve
s, those hands which he loved and hated, held him in their power.  "Six hundred r
ubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back's impossible... Oh, how pleasant 
it was at home!... The knave, double or quits... it can't be!... And why is he do
ing this to me?" Rostov pondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dolokhov r
efused to accept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him, and a
t one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridge over t
he Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to hand from the crumpled
 heap under the table would save him, now counted the cords on his coat and took 
a card with that number and tried staking the total of his losses on it, then he 
looked round for aid from the other players, or peered at the now cold face of Do
lokhov and tried to read what was passing in his mind.  "He knows of course what 
this loss means to me. He can't want my ruin. Wasn't he my friend? Wasn't I fond 
of him? But it's not his fault. What's he to do if he has such luck?... And it's 
not my fault either," he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have I k
illed anyone, or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a terrible misfortun
e? And when did it begin? Such a little while ago I came to this table with the t
hought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma's name day and th
en going home. I was so happy, so free, so lighthearted! And I did not realize ho
w happy I was! When did that end and when did this new, terrible state of things 
begin? What marked the change? I sat all the time in this same place at this tabl
e, chose and placed cards, and watched those broadboned agile hands in the same w
ay. When did it happen and what has happened? I am well and strong and still the 
same and in the same place. No, it can't be! Surely it will all end in nothing!" 
 He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was not hot. His face
 was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helpless efforts to seem ca
lm.  The score against him reached the fateful sum of fortythree thousand. Rostov
 had just prepared a card, by bending the corner of which he meant to double the 
three thousand just put down to his score, when Dolokhov, slamming down the pack 
of cards, put it aside and began rapidly adding up the total of Rostov's debt, br
eaking the chalk as he marked the figures in his clear, bold hand.  "Supper, it's
 time for supper! And here are the gypsies!"  Some swarthy men and women were rea
lly entering from the cold outside and saying something in their gypsy accents. N
icholas understood that it was all over but he said in an indifferent tone  "Well
, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it were the fun of the
 game which interested him most.  "It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he. "Now a bul
let through my brainthat's all that's left me!" And at the same time he said in a
 cheerful voice  "Come now, just this one more little card!"  "All right!" said D
olokhov, having finished the addition. "All right! Twentyone rubles," he said, po
inting to the figure twentyone by which the total exceeded the round sum of forty
three thousand and taking up a pack he prepared to deal. Rostov submissively unbe
nt the corner of his card and, instead of the six thousand he had intended, caref
ully wrote twentyone.  "It's all the same to me," he said. "I only want to see wh
ether you will let me win this ten, or beat it."  Dolokhov began to deal seriousl
y. Oh, how Rostov detested at that moment those hands with their short reddish fi
ngers and hairy wrists, which held him in their power.... The ten fell to him.  "
You owe fortythree thousand, Count," said Dolokhov, and stretching himself he ros
e from the table. "One does get tired sitting so long," he added.  "Yes, I'm tire
d too," said Rostov.  Dolokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not
 for him to jest.  "When am I to receive the money, Count?"  Rostov, flushing, dr
ew Dolokhov into the next room.  "I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take 
an I.O.U.?" he said.  "I say, Rostov," said Dolokhov clearly, smiling and looking
 Nicholas straight in the eyes, "you know the saying, 'Lucky in love, unlucky at 
cards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I know."  "Oh, it's terrible to feel one
self so in this man's power," thought Rostov. He knew what a shock he would infli
ct on his father and mother by the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it wo
uld be to escape it all, and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save him from 
all this shame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as a cat does with a m
ouse.  "Your cousin..." Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted him.  "
My cousin has nothing to do with this and it's not necessary to mention her!" he 
exclaimed fiercely.  "Then when am I to have it?"  "Tomorrow," replied Rostov and
 left the room.      CHAPTER XV   To say "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified tone 
was not difficult, but to go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and fa
ther, confess and ask for money he had no right to after giving his word of honor
, was terrible.  At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, after r
eturning from the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord. 
As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphere of love wh
ich pervaded the Rostov household that winter and, now after Dolokhov's proposal 
and Iogel's ball, seemed to have grown thicker round Sonya and Natasha as the air
 does before a thunderstorm. Sonya and Natasha, in the lightblue dresses they had
 worn at the theater, looking pretty and conscious of it, were standing by the cl
avichord, happy and smiling. Vera was playing chess with Shinshin in the drawing 
room. The old countess, waiting for the return of her husband and son, sat playin
g patience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house. Denisov, with spark
ling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord striking chords with his short 
fingers, his legs thrown back and his eyes rolling as he sang, with his small, hu
sky, but true voice, some verses called "Enchantress," which he had composed, and
 to which he was trying to fit music     Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre   
 What magic power is this recalls me still?    What spark has set my inmost soul 
on fire,    What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?  He was singing in p
assionate tones, gazing with his sparkling blackagate eyes at the frightened and 
happy Natasha.  "Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natasha. "Another verse," she sa
id, without noticing Nicholas.  "Everything's still the same with them," thought 
Nicholas, glancing into the drawing room, where he saw Vera and his mother with t
he old lady.  "Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, running up to him.  "Is P
apa at home?" he asked.  "I am so glad you've come!" said Natasha, without answer
ing him. "We are enjoying ourselves! Vasili Dmitrich is staying a day longer for 
my sake! Did you know?"  "No, Papa is not back yet," said Sonya.  "Nicholas, have
 you come? Come here, dear!" called the old countess from the drawing room.  Nich
olas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at her table began t
o watch her hands arranging the cards. From the dancing room, they still heard th
e laughter and merry voices trying to persuade Natasha to sing.  "All wight! All 
wight!" shouted Denisov. "It's no good making excuses now! It's your turn to sing
 the ba'cawollaI entweat you!"  The countess glanced at her silent son.  "What is
 the matter?" she asked.  "Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being continuall
y asked the same question. "Will Papa be back soon?"  "I expect so."  "Everything
's the same with them. They know nothing about it! Where am I to go?" thought Nic
holas, and went again into the dancing room where the clavichord stood.  Sonya wa
s sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to Denisov's favorite barcarolle
. Natasha was preparing to sing. Denisov was looking at her with enraptured eyes.
  Nicholas began pacing up and down the room.  "Why do they want to make her sing
? How can she sing? There's nothing to be happy about!" thought he.  Sonya struck
 the first chord of the prelude.  "My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bul
let through my brain is the only thing left menot singing!" his thoughts ran on. 
"Go away? But where to? It's onelet them sing!"  He continued to pace the room, l
ooking gloomily at Denisov and the girls and avoiding their eyes.  "Nikolenka, wh
at is the matter?" Sonya's eyes fixed on him seemed to ask. She noticed at once t
hat something had happened to him.  Nicholas turned away from her. Natasha too, w
ith her quick instinct, had instantly noticed her brother's condition. But, thoug
h she noticed it, she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far fro
m sorrow, sadness, or selfreproach, that she purposely deceived herself as young 
people often do. "No, I am too happy now to spoil my enjoyment by sympathy with a
nyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said to herself "No, I must be mistaken, he mu
st be feeling happy, just as I am."  "Now, Sonya!" she said, going to the very mi
ddle of the room, where she considered the resonance was best.  Having lifted her
 head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as ballet dancers do, Natasha, rising en
ergetically from her heels to her toes, stepped to the middle of the room and sto
od still.  "Yes, that's me!" she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with whic
h Denisov followed her.  "And what is she so pleased about?" thought Nicholas, lo
oking at his sister. "Why isn't she dull and ashamed?"  Natasha took the first no
te, her throat swelled, her chest rose, her eyes became serious. At that moment s
he was oblivious of her surroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds whi
ch anyone may produce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but which
 leave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrill you and m
ake you weep.  Natasha, that winter, had for the first time begun to sing serious
ly, mainly because Denisov so delighted in her singing. She no longer sang as a c
hild, there was no longer in her singing that comical, childish, painstaking effe
ct that had been in it before but she did not yet sing well, as all the connoisse
urs who heard her said "It is not trained, but it is a beautiful voice that must 
be trained." Only they generally said this some time after she had finished singi
ng. While that untrained voice, with its incorrect breathing and labored transiti
ons, was sounding, even the connoisseurs said nothing, but only delighted in it a
nd wished to hear it again. In her voice there was a virginal freshness, an uncon
sciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrained velvety softness, which so 
mingled with her lack of art in singing that it seemed as if nothing in that voic
e could be altered without spoiling it.  "What is this?" thought Nicholas, listen
ing to her with widely opened eyes. "What has happened to her? How she is singing
 today!" And suddenly the whole world centered for him on anticipation of the nex
t note, the next phrase, and everything in the world was divided into three beats
 "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... one, two, three... One... "Oh mi
o crudele affetto."... One, two, three... One. "Oh, this senseless life of ours!"
 thought Nicholas. "All this misery, and money, and Dolokhov, and anger, and hono
rit's all nonsense... but this is real.... Now then, Natasha, now then, dearest! 
Now then, darling! How will she take that si? She's taken it! Thank God!" And wit
hout noticing that he was singing, to strengthen the si he sung a second, a third
 below the high note. "Ah, God! How fine! Did I really take it? How fortunate!" h
e thought.  Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was fin
est in Rostov's soul! And this something was apart from everything else in the wo
rld and above everything in the world. "What were losses, and Dolokhov, and words
 of honor?... All nonsense! One might kill and rob and yet be happy..."      CHAP
TER XVI   It was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he did t
hat day. But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than reality again pre
sented itself. He got up without saying a word and went downstairs to his own roo
m. A quarter of an hour later the old count came in from his Club, cheerful and c
ontented. Nicholas, hearing him drive up, went to meet him.  "Wellhad a good time
?" said the old count, smiling gaily and proudly at his son.  Nicholas tried to s
ay "Yes," but could not and he nearly burst into sobs. The count was lighting his
 pipe and did not notice his son's condition.  "Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought
 Nicholas, for the first and last time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, wh
ich made him feel ashamed of himself, he said, as if merely asking his father to 
let him have the carriage to drive to town  "Papa, I have come on a matter of bus
iness. I was nearly forgetting. I need some money."  "Dear me!" said his father, 
who was in a specially good humor. "I told you it would not be enough. How much?"
  "Very much," said Nicholas flushing, and with a stupid careless smile, for whic
h he was long unable to forgive himself, "I have lost a little, I mean a good dea
l, a great dealforty three thousand."  "What! To whom?... Nonsense!" cried the co
unt, suddenly reddening with an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people
 do.  "I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.  "Well!..." said the old count
, spreading out his arms and sinking helplessly on the sofa.  "It can't be helped
 It happens to everyone!" said the son, with a bold, free, and easy tone, while i
n his soul he regarded himself as a worthless scoundrel whose whole life could no
t atone for his crime. He longed to kiss his father's hands and kneel to beg his 
forgiveness, but said, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to ever
yone!  The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son's words and began bust
lingly searching for something.  "Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, 
I fear, difficult to raise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?"  A
nd with a furtive glance at his son's face, the count went out of the room.... Ni
cholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at all expected this.  "Papa
! Papa!" he called after him, sobbing, "forgive me!" And seizing his father's han
d, he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears.  While father and son were hav
ing their explanation, the mother and daughter were having one not less important
. Natasha came running to her mother, quite excited.  "Mamma!... Mamma!... He has
 made me..."  "Made what?"  "Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!" she exclaimed
.  The countess did not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. To whom? To this 
chit of a girl, Natasha, who not so long ago was playing with dolls and who was s
till having lessons.  "Don't, Natasha! What nonsense!" she said, hoping it was a 
joke.  "Nonsense, indeed! I am telling you the fact," said Natasha indignantly. "
I come to ask you what to do, and you call it 'nonsense!'"  The countess shrugged
 her shoulders.  "If it is true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, te
ll him he is a fool, that's all!"  "No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indigna
ntly and seriously.  "Well then, what do you want? You're all in love nowadays. W
ell, if you are in love, marry him!" said the countess, with a laugh of annoyance
. "Good luck to you!"  "No, Mamma, I'm not in love with him, I suppose I'm not in
 love with him."  "Well then, tell him so."  "Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cros
s, dear! Is it my fault?"  "No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and
 tell him?" said the countess smiling.  "No, I will do it myself, only tell me wh
at to say. It's all very well for you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile. "Y
ou should have seen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came
 out accidently."  "Well, all the same, you must refuse him."  "No, I mustn't. I 
am so sorry for him! He's so nice."  "Well then, accept his offer. It's high time
 for you to be married," answered the countess sharply and sarcastically.  "No, M
amma, but I'm so sorry for him. I don't know how I'm to say it."  "And there's no
thing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself," said the countess, indignant 
that they should have dared to treat this little Natasha as grown up.  "No, not o
n any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listen at the door," and Natash
a ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall, where Denisov was sitting on t
he same chair by the clavichord with his face in his hands.  He jumped up at the 
sound of her light step.  "Nataly," he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, 
"decide my fate. It is in your hands."  "Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!..
. No, but you are so nice... but it won't do...not that... but as a friend, I sha
ll always love you."  Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she
 did not understand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At this instant, they
 heard the quick rustle of the countess' dress. She came up to them.  "Vasili Dmi
trich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with an embarrassed voice, though it
 sounded severe to Denisov"but my daughter is so young, and I thought that, as my
 son's friend, you would have addressed yourself first to me. In that case you wo
uld not have obliged me to give this refusal."  "Countess..." said Denisov, with 
downcast eyes and a guilty face. He tried to say more, but faltered.  Natasha cou
ld not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. She began to sob aloud.  "Counte
ss, I have done w'ong," Denisov went on in an unsteady voice, "but believe me, I 
so adore your daughter and all your family that I would give my life twice over..
." He looked at the countess, and seeing her severe face said "Well, goodby, Coun
tess," and kissing her hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, withou
t looking at Natasha.   Next day Rostov saw Denisov off. He did not wish to stay 
another day in Moscow. All Denisov's Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertain
ment at the gypsies', with the result that he had no recollection of how he was p
ut in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey.  After Denisov's de
parture, Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow, without going out of the house
, waiting for the money his father could not at once raise, and he spent most of 
his time in the girls' room.  Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever.
 It was as if she wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that mad
e her love him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of her.
  He filled the girls' albums with verses and music, and having at last sent Dolo
khov the whole fortythree thousand rubles and received his receipt, he left at th
e end of November, without taking leave of any of his acquaintances, to overtake 
his regiment which was already in Poland.      BOOK FIVE 1806  07      CHAPTER I 
  After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At the Torzhok po
st station, either there were no horses or the postmaster would not supply them. 
Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing, he lay down on the leather sofa i
n front of a round table, put his big feet in their overboots on the table, and b
egan to reflect.  "Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? And a bed got ready
, and tea?" asked his valet.  Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw
 anything. He had begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on t
he same questionone so important that he took no notice of what went on around hi
m. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to Petersburg earlier or late
r, or whether he secured accommodation at this station, but compared to the thoug
hts that now occupied him it was a matter of indifference whether he remained the
re for a few hours or for the rest of his life.  The postmaster, his wife, the va
let, and a peasant woman selling Torzhok embroidery came into the room offering t
heir services. Without changing his careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over
 his spectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they could go on liv
ing without having solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had been engrosse
d by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki after the du
el and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless night. But now, in the solitude 
of the journey, they seized him with special force. No matter what he thought abo
ut, he always returned to these same questions which he could not solve and yet c
ould not cease to ask himself. It was as if the thread of the chief screw which h
eld his life together were stripped, so that the screw could not get in or out, b
ut went on turning uselessly in the same place.  The postmaster came in and began
 obsequiously to beg his excellency to wait only two hours, when, come what might
, he would let his excellency have the courier horses. It was plain that he was l
ying and only wanted to get more money from the traveler.  "Is this good or bad?"
 Pierre asked himself. "It is good for me, bad for another traveler, and for hims
elf it's unavoidable, because he needs money for food the man said an officer had
 once given him a thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horse
s. But the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible. 
And I," continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured, and
 Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal, and a year later 
they executed those who executed himalso for some reason. What is bad? What is go
od? What should one love and what hate? What does one live for? And what am I? Wh
at is life, and what is death? What power governs all?"  There was no answer to a
ny of these questions, except one, and that not a logical answer and not at all a
 reply to them. The answer was "You'll die and all will end. You'll die and know 
all, or cease asking." But dying was also dreadful.  The Torzhok peddler woman, i
n a whining voice, went on offering her wares, especially a pair of goatskin slip
pers. "I have hundreds of rubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in 
her tattered cloak looking timidly at me," he thought. "And what does she want th
e money for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth to happiness or peace of
 mind. Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey to evil and death?dea
th which ends all and must come today or tomorrowat any rate, in an instant as co
mpared with eternity." And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread, a
nd again it turned uselessly in the same place.  His servant handed him a halfcut
 novel, in the form of letters, by Madame de Souza. He began reading about the su
fferings and virtuous struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. "And why did she
 resist her seducer when she loved him?" he thought. "God could not have put into
 her heart an impulse that was against His will. My wifeas she once wasdid not st
ruggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing has been found out, nothing discovered
," Pierre again said to himself. "All we can know is that we know nothing. And th
at's the height of human wisdom."  Everything within and around him seemed confus
ed, senseless, and repellent. Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstance
s Pierre found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction.  "I make bold to ask your exce
llency to move a little for this gentleman," said the postmaster, entering the ro
om followed by another traveler, also detained for lack of horses.  The newcomer 
was a short, largeboned, yellowfaced, wrinkled old man, with gray bushy eyebrows 
overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite grayish color.  Pierre took his feet off
 the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed that had been got ready for him, glan
cing now and then at the newcomer, who, with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily
 taking off his wraps with the aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. Wit
h a pair of felt boots on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeencover
ed, sheepskin coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his big head w
ith its broad temples and closecropped hair, and looked at Bezukhov. The stern, s
hrewd, and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre. He felt a wish to s
peak to the stranger, but by the time he had made up his mind to ask him a questi
on about the roads, the traveler had closed his eyes. His shriveled old hands wer
e folded and on the finger of one of them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring w
ith a seal representing a death's head. The stranger sat without stirring, either
 resting or, as it seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His se
rvant was also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache, evidently n
ot because he was shaven but because they had never grown. This active old servan
t was unpacking the traveler's canteen and preparing tea. He brought in a boiling
 samovar. When everything was ready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the t
able, filled a tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to 
whom he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the need, even
 the inevitability, of entering into conversation with this stranger.  The servan
t brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with an unfinished bit of nibble
d sugar, and asked if anything more would be wanted.       * To indicate he did n
ot want more tea.   "No. Give me the book," said the stranger.  The servant hande
d him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work, and the traveler became a
bsorbed in it. Pierre looked at him. All at once the stranger closed the book, pu
tting in a marker, and again, leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat 
in his former position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had not time 
to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady and severe gaze
 straight on Pierre's face.  Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look, 
but the bright old eyes attracted him irresistibly.      CHAPTER II   "I have the
 pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov, if I am not mistaken," said the stranger 
in a deliberate and loud voice.  Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him ov
er his spectacles.  "I have heard of you, my dear sir," continued the stranger, "
and of your misfortune." He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to say"Yes, 
misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that what happened to you in Moscow w
as a misfortune.""I regret it very much, my dear sir."  Pierre flushed and, hurri
edly putting his legs down from the bed, bent forward toward the old man with a f
orced and timid smile.  "I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear si
r, but for greater reasons."  He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved asid
e on the sofa by way of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt
 reluctant to enter into conversation with this old man, but, submitting to him i
nvoluntarily, came up and sat down beside him.  "You are unhappy, my dear sir," t
he stranger continued. "You are young and I am old. I should like to help you as 
far as lies in my power."  "Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. "I am ver
y grateful to you. Where are you traveling from?"  The stranger's face was not ge
nial, it was even cold and severe, but in spite of this, both the face and words 
of his new acquaintance were irresistibly attractive to Pierre.  "But if for reas
on you don't feel inclined to talk to me," said the old man, "say so, my dear sir
." And he suddenly smiled, in an unexpected and tenderly paternal way.  "Oh no, n
ot at all! On the contrary, I am very glad to make your acquaintance," said Pierr
e. And again, glancing at the stranger's hands, he looked more closely at the rin
g, with its skulla Masonic sign.  "Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?" 
 "Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons," said the stranger, looking
 deeper and deeper into Pierre's eyes. "And in their name and my own I hold out a
 brotherly hand to you."  "I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering betwe
en the confidence the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own ha
bit of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs"I am afraid I am very far from understandin
ghow am I to put it?I am afraid my way of looking at the world is so opposed to y
ours that we shall not understand one another."  "I know your outlook," said the 
Mason, "and the view of life you mention, and which you think is the result of yo
ur own mental efforts, is the one held by the majority of people, and is the inva
riable fruit of pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if 
I had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of life is a regret
table delusion."  "Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," said Pierre, with a 
faint smile.  "I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said the Mason,
 whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness. "No one
 can attain to truth by himself. Only by laying stone on stone with the cooperati
on of all, by the millions of generations from our forefather Adam to our own tim
es, is that temple reared which is to be a worthy dwelling place of the Great God
," he added, and closed his eyes.  "I ought to tell you that I do not believe... 
do not believe in God," said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it e
ssential to speak the whole truth.  The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smile
d as a rich man with millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him t
hat he, poor man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.  "Yes, you d
o not know Him, my dear sir," said the Mason. "You cannot know Him. You do not kn
ow Him and that is why you are unhappy."  "Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pier
re. "But what am I to do?"  "You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very u
nhappy. You do not know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He i
s in thee, and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered!" pronounce
d the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.  He paused and sighed, evidently tryi
ng to calm himself.  "If He were not," he said quietly, "you and I would not be s
peaking of Him, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom hast thou de
nied?" he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in his voice. "Who
 invented Him, if He did not exist? Whence came thy conception of the existence o
f such an incomprehensible Being? didst thou, and why did the whole world, concei
ve the idea of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being, a Being allpowerf
ul, eternal, and infinite in all His attributes?..."  He stopped and remained sil
ent for a long time.  Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.  "
He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason began again, looking not at 
Pierre but straight before him, and turning the leaves of his book with his old h
ands which from excitement he could not keep still. "If it were a man whose exist
ence thou didst doubt I could bring him to thee, could take him by the hand and s
how him to thee. But how can I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence, Hi
s infinity, and all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he 
may not see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness and 
sinfulness?" He paused again. "Who art thou? Thou dreamest that thou art wise bec
ause thou couldst utter those blasphemous words," he went on, with a somber and s
cornful smile. "And thou art more foolish and unreasonable than a little child, w
ho, playing with the parts of a skillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he d
oes not understand its use, he does not believe in the master who made it. To kno
w Him is hard.... For ages, from our forefather Adam to our own day, we labor to 
attain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim but in our lack o
f understanding we see only our weakness and His greatness...."  Pierre listened 
with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason's face with shining eyes, not interrup
ting or questioning him, but believing with his whole soul what the stranger said
. Whether he accepted the wise reasoning contained in the Mason's words, or belie
ved as a child believes, in the speaker's tone of conviction and earnestness, or 
the tremor of the speaker's voicewhich sometimes almost brokeor those brilliant a
ged eyes grown old in this conviction, or the calm firmness and certainty of his 
vocation, which radiated from his whole being and which struck Pierre especially 
by contrast with his own dejection and hopelessnessat any rate, Pierre longed wit
h his whole soul to believe and he did believe, and felt a joyful sense of comfor
t, regeneration, and return to life.  "He is not to be apprehended by reason, but
 by life," said the Mason.  "I do not understand," said Pierre, feeling with dism
ay doubts reawakening. He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, in t
he Mason's arguments he dreaded not to be able to believe in him. "I don't unders
tand," he said, "how it is that the mind of man cannot attain the knowledge of wh
ich you speak."  The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.  "The highest w
isdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to imbibe," he said. "Can 
I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel and judge of its purity? Only by
 the inner purification of myself can I retain in some degree of purity the liqui
d I receive."  "Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully.  "The highest wisdom
 is not founded on reason alone, not on those worldly sciences of physics, histor
y, chemistry, and the like, into which intellectual knowledge is divided. The hig
hest wisdom is one. The highest wisdom has but one sciencethe science of the whol
ethe science explaining the whole creation and man's place in it. To receive that
 science it is necessary to purify and renew one's inner self, and so before one 
can know, it is necessary to believe and to perfect one's self. And to attain thi
s end, we have the light called conscience that God has implanted in our souls." 
 "Yes, yes," assented Pierre.  "Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the 
spirit, and ask thyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou att
ained relying on reason only? What art thou? You are young, you are rich, you are
 clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all these good gifts?
 Are you content with yourself and with your life?"  "No, I hate my life," Pierre
 muttered, wincing.  "Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself and as thou 
art purified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir. How have you
 spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receiving everything from society an
d giving nothing in return. You have become the possessor of wealth. How have you
 used it? What have you done for your neighbor? Have you ever thought of your ten
s of thousands of slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You ha
ve profited by their toil to lead a profligate life. That is what you have done. 
Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your neighbor? No! You
 have spent your life in idleness. Then you married, my dear sirtook on yourself 
responsibility for the guidance of a young woman and what have you done? You have
 not helped her to find the way of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into a
n abyss of deceit and misery. A man offended you and you shot him, and you say yo
u do not know God and hate your life. There is nothing strange in that, my dear s
ir!"  After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, again lean
ed his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre looked at that ag
ed, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and moved his lips without uttering a
 sound. He wished to say, "Yes, a vile, idle, vicious life!" but dared not break 
the silence.  The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called his
 servant.  "How about the horses?" he asked, without looking at Pierre.  "The exc
hange horses have just come," answered the servant. "Will you not rest here?"  "N
o, tell them to harness."  "Can he really be going away leaving me alone without 
having told me all, and without promising to help me?" thought Pierre, rising wit
h downcast head and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally at the Mason
. "Yes, I never thought of it, but I have led a contemptible and profligate life,
 though I did not like it and did not want to," thought Pierre. "But this man kno
ws the truth and, if he wished to, could disclose it to me."  Pierre wished to sa
y this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The traveler, having packed his things 
with his practiced hands, began fastening his coat. When he had finished, he turn
ed to Bezukhov, and said in a tone of indifferent politeness  "Where are you goin
g to now, my dear sir?"  "I?... I'm going to Petersburg," answered Pierre, in a c
hildlike, hesitating voice. "I thank you. I agree with all you have said. But do 
not suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what you would have 
me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is I, above all, who am t
o blame for everything. Help me, teach me, and perhaps I may..."  Pierre could no
t go on. He gulped and turned away.  The Mason remained silent for a long time, e
vidently considering.  "Help comes from God alone," he said, "but such measure of
 help as our Order can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are going to P
etersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" he took out his notebook and wrote a few
 words on a large sheet of paper folded in four. "Allow me to give you a piece of
 advice. When you reach the capital, first of all devote some time to solitude an
d selfexamination and do not resume your former way of life. And now I wish you a
 good journey, my dear sir," he added, seeing that his servant had entered... "an
d success."  The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev, as Pierre saw from the p
ostmaster's book. Bazdeev had been one of the bestknown Freemasons and Martinists
, even in Novikov's time. For a long while after he had gone, Pierre did not go t
o bed or order horses but paced up and down the room, pondering over his vicious 
past, and with a rapturous sense of beginning anew pictured to himself the blissf
ul, irreproachable, virtuous future that seemed to him so easy. It seemed to him 
that he had been vicious only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to 
be virtuous. Not a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul. He firmly bel
ieved in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim of supportin
g one another in the path of virtue, and that is how Freemasonry presented itself
 to him.      CHAPTER III   On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know
 of his arrival, he went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas a Kempis,
 whose book had been sent him by someone unknown. One thing he continually realiz
ed as he read that book the joy, hitherto unknown to him, of believing in the pos
sibility of attaining perfection, and in the possibility of active brotherly love
 among men, which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to him. A week after his arrival
, the young Polish count, Willarski, whom Pierre had known slightly in Petersburg
 society, came into his room one evening in the official and ceremonious manner i
n which Dolokhov's second had called on him, and, having closed the door behind h
im and satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the room, addressed Pierre
.  "I have come to you with a message and an offer, Count," he said without sitti
ng down. "A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood has made application 
for you to be received into our Order before the usual term and has proposed to m
e to be your sponsor. I consider it a sacred duty to fulfill that person's wishes
. Do you wish to enter the Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship?"  The 
cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost always before met at balls, am
iably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women, surprised Pierre.  "Yes
, I do wish it," said he.  Willarski bowed his head.  "One more question, Count,"
 he said, "which I beg you to answer in all sinceritynot as a future Mason but as
 an honest man have you renounced your former convictionsdo you believe in God?" 
 Pierre considered.  "Yes... yes, I believe in God," he said.  "In that case..." 
began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.  "Yes, I do believe in God," he repe
ated.  "In that case we can go," said Willarski. "My carriage is at your service.
"  Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre's inquiries as to what he
 must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied that brothers more wort
hy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to tell the truth.  Having ent
ered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had its headquarters, and hav
ing ascended a dark staircase, they entered a small welllit anteroom where they t
ook off their cloaks without the aid of a servant. From there they passed into an
other room. A man in strange attire appeared at the door. Willarski, stepping tow
ard him, said something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a sm
all wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen before. H
aving taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski bound Pierre's eyes with it a
nd tied it in a knot behind, catching some hairs painfully in the knot. Then he d
rew his face down, kissed him, and taking him by the hand led him forward. The ha
irs tied in the knot hurt Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a s
hamefaced smile. His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a puckered, tho
ugh smiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain, timid steps.  Having led 
him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.  "Whatever happens to you," he said, "you
 must bear it all manfully if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood." 
Pierre nodded affirmatively. "When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncover
 your eyes," added Willarski. "I wish you courage and success," and, pressing Pie
rre's hand, he went out.  Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Onc
e or twice he shrugged his and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if wishing to 
take it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent with his eyes bandaged
 seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, his legs almost gave way, it seemed t
o him that he was tired out. He experienced a variety of most complex sensations.
 He felt afraid of what would happen to him and still more afraid of showing his 
fear. He felt curious to know what was going to happen and what would be revealed
 to him but most of all, he felt joyful that the moment had come when he would at
 last start on that path of regeneration and on the actively virtuous life of whi
ch he had been dreaming since he met Joseph Alexeevich. Loud knocks were heard at
 the door. Pierre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him. The room 
was in black darkness, only a small lamp was burning inside something white. Pier
re went nearer and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open 
book. The book was the Gospel, and the white thing with the lamp inside was a hum
an skull with its cavities and teeth. After reading the first words of the Gospel
 "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God," Pierre went round the
 table and saw a large open box filled with something. It was a coffin with bones
 inside. He was not at all surprised by what he saw. Hoping to enter on an entire
ly new life quite unlike the old one, he expected everything to be unusual, even 
more unusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a coffin, the Gospelit seemed to h
im that he had expected all this and even more. Trying to stimulate his emotions 
he looked around. "God, death, love, the brotherhood of man," he kept saying to h
imself, associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas. The door opened and 
someone came in.  By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed
, he saw rather short man. Having evidently come from the light into the darkness
, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward the table and placed on i
t his small leathergloved hands.  This short man had on a white leather apron whi
ch covered his chest and part of his legs he had on a kind of necklace above whic
h rose a high white ruffle, outlining his rather long face which was lit up from 
below.  "For what have you come hither?" asked the newcomer, turning in Pierre's 
direction at a slight rustle made by the latter. "Why have you, who do not believ
e in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light, come here? What do y
ou seek from us? Wisdom, virtue, enlightenment?"  At the moment the door opened a
nd the stranger came in, Pierre felt a sense of awe and veneration such as he had
 experienced in his boyhood at confession he felt himself in the presence of one 
socially a complete stranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man. W
ith bated breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor by which name the b
rother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was known. Drawing
 nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew, Smolyaninov, and it mortified
 him to think that the newcomer was an acquaintancehe wished him simply a brother
 and a virtuous instructor. For a long time he could not utter a word, so that th
e Rhetor had to repeat his question.  "Yes... I... I... desire regeneration," Pie
rre uttered with difficulty.  "Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once 
"Have you any idea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach yo
ur aim?" said he quietly and quickly.  "I... hope... for guidance... help... in r
egeneration," said Pierre, with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utteranc
e due to his excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in
 Russian.  "What is your conception of Freemasonry?"  "I imagine that Freemasonry
 is the fraternity and equality of men who have virtuous aims," said Pierre, feel
ing ashamed of the inadequacy of his words for the solemnity of the moment, as he
 spoke. "I imagine..."  "Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied wit
h this answer. "Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion?"  "N
o, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it," said Pierre, so softly that 
the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was saying. "I have been an ath
eist," answered Pierre.  "You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws i
n your life, therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?" said the Rhet
or, after a moment's pause.  "Yes, yes," assented Pierre.  The Rhetor cleared his
 throat, crossed his gloved hands on his breast, and began to speak.  "Now I must
 disclose to you the chief aim of our Order," he said, "and if this aim coincides
 with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood with profit. The first and chief objec
t of our Order, the foundation on which it rests and which no human power can des
troy, is the preservation and handing on to posterity of a certain important myst
ery... which has come down to us from the remotest ages, even from the first mana
 mystery on which perhaps the fate of mankind depends. But since this mystery is 
of such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared by long and
 diligent selfpurification, not everyone can hope to attain it quickly. Hence we 
have a secondary aim, that of preparing our members as much as possible to reform
 their hearts, to purify and enlighten their minds, by means handed on to us by t
radition from those who have striven to attain this mystery, and thereby to rende
r them capable of receiving it.  "By purifying and regenerating our members we tr
y, thirdly, to improve the whole human race, offering it in our members an exampl
e of piety and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil whic
h sways the world. Think this over and I will come to you again."  "To combat the
 evil which sways the world..." Pierre repeated, and a mental image of his future
 activity in this direction rose in his mind. He imagined men such as he had hims
elf been a fortnight ago, and he addressed an edifying exhortation to them. He im
agined to himself vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and
 deed, imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue. Of the three objects me
ntioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improving mankind, especially appealed 
to Pierre. The important mystery mentioned by the Rhetor, though it aroused his c
uriosity, did not seem to him essential, and the second aim, that of purifying an
d regenerating himself, did not much interest him because at that moment he felt 
with delight that he was already perfectly cured of his former faults and was rea
dy for all that was good.  Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the 
seeker of the seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon's temple
, which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. These virtues were 1. Discre
tion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedience to those of higher ra
nks in the Order.  3. Morality.  4. Love of mankind. 5. Courage. 6. Generosity. 7
. The love of death.  "In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of deat
h," the Rhetor said, "to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, but as
 a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue from this distr
essful life, and leads it to its place of recompense and peace."  "Yes, that must
 be so," thought Pierre, when after these words the Rhetor went away, leaving him
 to solitary meditation. "It must be so, but I am still so weak that I love my li
fe, the meaning of which is only now gradually opening before me." But five of th
e other virtues which Pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt alre
ady in his soul courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind, and especially ob
ediencewhich did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy. He now felt so glad to
 be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will to those who knew the in
dubitable truth. He forgot what the seventh virtue was and could not recall it.  
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre whether he was 
still firm in his intention and determined to submit to all that would be require
d of him.  "I am ready for everything," said Pierre.  "I must also inform you," s
aid the Rhetor, "that our Order delivers its teaching not in words only but also 
by other means, which may perhaps have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker af
ter wisdom and virtue than mere words. This chamber with what you see therein sho
uld already have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than words could
 do. You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a like method of enligh
tenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies that explained their teaching b
y hieroglyphics. A hieroglyph," said the Rhetor, "is an emblem of something not c
ognizable by the senses but which possesses qualities resembling those of the sym
bol."  Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. He liste
ned to the Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that his ordeal was about 
to begin.  "If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation," said the Rhetor c
oming closer to Pierre. "In token of generosity I ask you to give me all your val
uables."  "But I have nothing here," replied Pierre, supposing that he was asked 
to give up all he possessed.  "What you have with you watch, money, rings...."  P
ierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage for some time to
 get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had been done, the Rhetor sai
d  "In token of obedience, I ask you to undress."  Pierre took off his coat, wais
tcoat, and left boot according to the Rhetor's instructions. The Mason drew the s
hirt back from Pierre's left breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of 
his trousers to above the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot 
also and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger the tro
uble, but the Mason told him that was not necessary and gave him a slipper for hi
s left foot. With a childlike smile of embarrassment, doubt, and selfderision, wh
ich appeared on his face against his will, Pierre stood with his arms hanging dow
n and legs apart, before his brother Rhetor, and awaited his further commands.  "
And now, in token of candor, I ask you to reveal to me your chief passion," said 
the latter.  "My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre.  "That passion whi
ch more than all others caused you to waver on the path of virtue," said the Maso
n.  Pierre paused, seeking a reply.  "Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritab
ility? Anger? Women?" He went over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of
 them to give the preeminence.  "Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible voice
.  The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this answer. At 
last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief that lay on the table, again 
bound his eyes.  "For the last time I say to youturn all your attention upon your
self, put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in passion but in yo
ur own heart. The source of blessedness is not without us but within...."  Pierre
 had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source of blessedness w
hich now flooded his heart with glad emotion.      CHAPTER IV   Soon after this t
here came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre, not the Rhetor but Pierre's spon
sor, Willarski, whom he recognized by his voice. To fresh questions as to the fir
mness of his resolution Pierre replied "Yes, yes, I agree," and with a beaming, c
hildlike smile, his fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timidly in one sli
ppered and one booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his bare
 chest. He was conducted from that room along passages that turned backwards and 
forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the Lodge. Willarski coughed, he
 was answered by the Masonic knock with mallets, the doors opened before them. A 
bass voice Pierre was still blindfolded questioned him as to who he was, when and
 where he was born, and so on. Then he was again led somewhere still blindfolded,
 and as they went along he was told allegories of the toils of his pilgrimage, of
 holy friendship, of the Eternal Architect of the universe, and of the courage wi
th which he should endure toils and dangers. During these wanderings, Pierre noti
ced that he was spoken of now as the "Seeker," now as the "Sufferer," and now as 
the "Postulant," to the accompaniment of various knockings with mallets and sword
s. As he was being led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty 
among his conductors. He heard those around him disputing in whispers and one of 
them insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet. After that they took
 his right hand, placed it on something, and told him to hold a pair of compasses
 to his left breast with the other hand and to repeat after someone who read alou
d an oath of fidelity to the laws of the Order. The candles were then extinguishe
d and some spirit lighted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told that he w
ould now see the lesser light. The bandage was taken off his eyes and, by the fai
nt light of the burning spirit, Pierre, as in a dream, saw several men standing b
efore him, wearing aprons like the Rhetor's and holding swords in their hands poi
nted at his breast. Among them stood a man whose white shirt was stained with blo
od. On seeing this, Pierre moved forward with his breast toward the swords, meani
ng them to pierce it. But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once 
blindfolded again.  "Now thou hast seen the lesser light," uttered a voice. Then 
the candles were relit and he was told that he would see the full light the banda
ge was again removed and more than ten voices said together "Sic transit gloria m
undi."  Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room an
d at the people in it. Round a long table covered with black sat some twelve men 
in garments like those he had already seen. Some of them Pierre had met in Peters
burg society. In the President's chair sat a young man he did not know, with a pe
culiar cross hanging from his neck. On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre
 had met at Anna Pavlovna's two years before. There were also present a very dist
inguished dignitary and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kuragins'. All
 maintained a solemn silence, listening to the words of the President, who held a
 mallet in his hand. Let into the wall was a starshaped light. At one side of the
 table was a small carpet with various figures worked upon it, at the other was s
omething resembling an altar on which lay a Testament and a skull. Round it stood
 seven large candlesticks like those used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pi
erre up to the altar, placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie down, say
ing that he must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple.  "He must first re
ceive the trowel," whispered one of the brothers.  "Oh, hush, please!" said anoth
er.  Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsighted eyes without obeying, 
and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? What am I doing? Aren't they 
laughing at me? Shan't I be ashamed to remember this?" But these doubts only last
ed a moment. Pierre glanced at the serious faces of those around, remembered all 
he had already gone through, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was 
aghast at his hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling, pro
strated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, the feeling of devoti
on returned to him even more strongly than before. When he had lain there some ti
me, he was told to get up, and a white leather apron, such as the others wore, wa
s put on him he was given a trowel and three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand 
Master addressed him. He told him that he should try to do nothing to stain the w
hiteness of that apron, which symbolized strength and purity then of the unexplai
ned trowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart from vice, and i
ndulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor. As to the first pair of g
loves, a man's, he said that Pierre could not know their meaning but must keep th
em. The second pair of man's gloves he was to wear at the meetings, and finally o
f the third, a pair of women's gloves, he said "Dear brother, these woman's glove
s are intended for you too. Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most of a
ll. This gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom you select to 
be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry." And after a pause, he added "But beware, dea
r brother, that these gloves do not deck hands that are unclean." While the Grand
 Master said these last words it seemed to Pierre that he grew embarrassed. Pierr
e himself grew still more confused, blushed like a child till tears came to his e
yes, began looking about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.  This silen
ce was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up to the rug and began read
ing to him from a manuscript book an explanation of all the figures on it the sun
, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, a trowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, 
a pillar, three windows, and so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was s
hown the signs of the Lodge, told the password, and at last was permitted to sit 
down. The Grand Master began reading the statutes. They were very long, and Pierr
e, from joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in a state to understand what 
was being read. He managed to follow only the last words of the statutes and thes
e remained in his mind.  "In our temples we recognize no other distinctions," rea
d the Grand Master, "but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making any dist
inctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother's aid whoever he may be, e
xhort him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth, never bear malice or enmity t
oward thy brother. Be kindly and courteous. Kindle in all hearts the flame of vir
tue. Share thy happiness with thy neighbor, and may envy never dim the purity of 
that bliss. Forgive thy enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him good. Th
us fulfilling the highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity whi
ch thou hast lost."  He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who
, with tears of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to answer the 
congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all sides. He ac
knowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men only brothers, and burned wi
th impatience to set to work with them.  The Grand Master rapped with his mallet.
 All the Masons sat down in their places, and one of them read an exhortation on 
the necessity of humility.  The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should b
e performed, and the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of "Collector of 
Alms" went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked to subscribe all he
 had, but fearing that it might look like pride subscribed the same amount as the
 others.  The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he ha
d returned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens of years, had become 
completely changed, and had quite left behind his former habits and way of life. 
     CHAPTER V   The day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre was si
tting at home reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the Square,
 one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, a third physical things,
 and the fourth a combination of these. Now and then his attention wandered from 
the book and the Square and he formed in imagination a new plan of life. On the p
revious evening at the Lodge, he had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached t
he Emperor and that it would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierre propose
d going to his estates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his ser
fs. He was joyfully planning this new life, when Prince Vasili suddenly entered t
he room.  "My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have you quarr
eled with Helene, mon cher? You are under a delusion," said Prince Vasili, as he 
entered. "I know all about it, and I can tell you positively that Helene is as in
nocent before you as Christ was before the Jews."  Pierre was about to reply, but
 Prince Vasili interrupted him.  "And why didn't you simply come straight to me a
s to a friend? I know all about it and understand it all," he said. "You behaved 
as becomes a man who values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't go into 
that. But consider the position in which you are placing her and me in the eyes o
f society, and even of the court," he added, lowering his voice. "She is living i
n Moscow and you are here. Remember, dear boy," and he drew Pierre's arm downward
s, "it is simply a misunderstanding. I expect you feel it so yourself. Let us wri
te her a letter at once, and she'll come here and all will be explained, or else,
 my dear boy, let me tell you it's quite likely you'll have to suffer for it."  P
rince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look.  "I know from reliable sources that 
the Dowager Empress is taking a keen interest in the whole affair. You know she i
s very gracious to Helene."  Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one han
d, Prince Vasili did not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begi
n to speak in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had firmly
 resolved to answer his fatherinlaw. Moreover, the words of the Masonic statutes,
 "be kindly and courteous," recurred to him. He blinked, went red, got up and sat
 down again, struggling with himself to do what was for him the most difficult th
ing in lifeto say an unpleasant thing to a man's face, to say what the other, who
ever he might be, did not expect. He was so used to submitting to Prince Vasili's
 tone of careless selfassurance that he felt he would be unable to withstand it n
ow, but he also felt that on what he said now his future dependedwhether he would
 follow the same old road, or that new path so attractively shown him by the Maso
ns, on which he firmly believed he would be reborn to a new life.  "Now, dear boy
," said Prince Vasili playfully, "say 'yes,' and I'll write to her myself, and we
 will kill the fatted calf."  But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful s
peech, Pierre, without looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like
 his father, muttered in a whisper  "Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please g
o!" And he jumped up and opened the door for him.  "Go!" he repeated, amazed at h
imself and glad to see the look of confusion and fear that showed itself on Princ
e Vasili's face.  "What's the matter with you? Are you ill?"  "Go!" the quivering
 voice repeated. And Prince Vasili had to go without receiving any explanation.  
A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons, and leav
ing large sums of money with them for alms, went away to his estates. His new bre
thren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons and promised to write to him
 and guide him in his new activity.      CHAPTER VI   The duel between Pierre and
 Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spite of the Emperor's severity regarding duels a
t that time, neither the principals nor their seconds suffered for it. But the st
ory of the duel, confirmed by Pierre's rupture with his wife, was the talk of soc
iety. Pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was an 
illegitimate son, and petted and extolled when he was the best match in Russia, h
ad sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his marriagewhen the marriageable 
daughters and their mothers had nothing to hope from himespecially as he did not 
know how, and did not wish, to court society's favor. Now he alone was blamed for
 what had happened, he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his fathe
r to fits of bloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre's departure Helene returned
 to Petersburg, she was received by all her acquaintances not only cordially, but
 even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune. When conversation turned o
n her husband Helene assumed a dignified expression, which with characteristic ta
ct she had acquired though she did not understand its significance. This expressi
on suggested that she had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly and tha
t her husband was a cross laid upon her by God. Prince Vasili expressed his opini
on more openly. He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and, pointing
 to his forehead, remarked  "A bit touchedI always said so."  "I said from the fi
rst," declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre, "I said at the time and before 
anyone else" she insisted on her priority "that that senseless young man was spoi
led by the depraved ideas of these days. I said so even at the time when everybod
y was in raptures about him, when he had just returned from abroad, and when, if 
you remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees. And how has it en
ded? I was against this marriage even then and foretold all that has happened."  
Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind of soirees as befo
resuch as she alone had the gift of arrangingat which was to be found "the cream 
of really good society, the bloom of the intellectual essence of Petersburg," as 
she herself put it. Besides this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's rec
eptions were also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new an
d interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the state of the p
olitical thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court society so dearly and distinc
tly indicated.  Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon's de
struction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the surrender of most of
 the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our troops had already entered P
russia and our second war with Napoleon was beginning, Anna Pavlovna gave one of 
her soirees. The "cream of really good society" consisted of the fascinating Hele
ne, forsaken by her husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had j
ust returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young man referred to
 in that drawing room as "a man of great merit" un homme de beaucoup de merite, a
 newly appointed maid of honor and her mother, and several other less noteworthy 
persons.  The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that evening wa
s Boris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from the Prussian
 army and was aidedecamp to a very important personage.  The temperature shown by
 the political thermometer to the company that evening was this  "Whatever the Eu
ropean sovereigns and commanders may do to countenance Bonaparte, and to cause me
, and us in general, annoyance and mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot
 alter. We shall not cease to express our sincere views on that subject, and can 
only say to the King of Prussia and others 'So much the worse for you. Tu l'as vo
ulu, George Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"  When Boris, who was to
 be served up to the guests, entered the drawing room, almost all the company had
 assembled, and the conversation, guided by Anna Pavlovna, was about our diplomat
ic relations with Austria and the hope of an alliance with her.  Boris, grown mor
e manly and looking fresh, rosy and selfpossessed, entered the drawing room elega
ntly dressed in the uniform of an aidedecamp and was duly conducted to pay his re
spects to the aunt and then brought back to the general circle.  Anna Pavlovna ga
ve him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to several persons whom he d
id not know, giving him a whispered description of each.  "Prince Hippolyte Kurag
in, M. Krug, the charge d'affaires from Copenhagena profound intellect," and simp
ly, "Mr. Shitova man of great merit"this of the man usually so described.  Thanks
 to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and the peculiarities of his rese
rved nature, Boris had managed during his service to place himself very advantage
ously. He was aidedecamp to a very important personage, had been sent on a very i
mportant mission to Prussia, and had just returned from there as a special messen
ger. He had become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he h
ad been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign might rank incompar
ably higher than a general, and according to which what was needed for success in
 the service was not effort or work, or courage, or perseverance, but only the kn
owledge of how to get on with those who can grant rewards, and he was himself oft
en surprised at the rapidity of his success and at the inability of others to und
erstand these things. In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, 
all his relations with old friends, all his plans for his future, were completely
 altered. He was not rich, but would spend his last groat to be better dressed th
an others, and would rather deprive himself of many pleasures than allow himself 
to be seen in a shabby equipage or appear in the streets of Petersburg in an old 
uniform. He made friends with and sought the acquaintance of only those above him
 in position and who could therefore be of use to him. He liked Petersburg and de
spised Moscow. The remembrance of the Rostovs' house and of his childish love for
 Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the Rostovs since 
the day of his departure for the army. To be in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room he c
onsidered an important step up in the service, and he at once understood his role
, letting his hostess make use of whatever interest he had to offer. He himself c
arefully scanned each face, appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy
 with each of those present, and the advantages that might accrue. He took the se
at indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the general conversati
on.  "Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that not 
even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them, and she doubts t
he means we have of gaining them. That is the actual phrase used by the Vienna ca
binet," said the Danish charge d'affaires.  "The doubt is flattering," said "the 
man of profound intellect," with a subtle smile.  "We must distinguish between th
e Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of Austria," said Mortemart. "The Emperor of Aus
tria can never have thought of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it.
"  "Ah, my dear vicomte," put in Anna Pavlovna, "L'Urope" for some reason she cal
led it Urope as if that were a specially refined French pronunciation which she c
ould allow herself when conversing with a Frenchman, "L'Urope ne sera jamais notr
e alliee sincere." *       * "Europe will never be our sincere ally."   After tha
t Anna Pavlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King of Prussia, in ord
er to draw Boris into the conversation.  Boris listened attentively to each of th
e speakers, awaiting his turn, but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at 
his neighbor, the beautiful Helene, whose eyes several times met those of the han
dsome young aidedecamp with a smile.  Speaking of the position of Prussia, Anna P
avlovna very naturally asked Boris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and i
n what state he found the Prussian army. Boris, speaking with deliberation, told 
them in pure, correct French many interesting details about the armies and the co
urt, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own about the facts h
e was recounting. For some time he engrossed the general attention, and Anna Pavl
ovna felt that the novelty she had served up was received with pleasure by all he
r visitors. The greatest attention of all to Boris' narrative was shown by Helene
. She asked him several questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested
 in the state of the Prussian army. As soon as he had finished she turned to him 
with her usual smile.  "You absolutely must come and see me," she said in a tone 
that implied that, for certain considerations he could not know of, this was abso
lutely necessary.  "On Tuesday between eight and nine. It will give me great plea
sure."  Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a conversation 
with her, when Anna Pavlovna called him away on the pretext that her aunt wished 
to hear him.  "You know her husband, of course?" said Anna Pavlovna, closing her 
eyes and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture. "Ah, she is such an unfortun
ate and charming woman! Don't mention him before herplease don't! It is too painf
ul for her!"      CHAPTER VII   When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the othe
rs Prince Hippolyte had the ear of the company.  Bending forward in his armchair 
he said "Le Roi de Prusse!" and having said this laughed. Everyone turned toward 
him.  "Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interrogatively, again laughing, and the
n calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pavlovna waited for him to go 
on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she began to tell of how at Pot
sdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the sword of Frederick the Great.  "It is t
he sword of Frederick the Great which I..." she began, but Hippolyte interrupted 
her with the words "Le Roi de Prusse..." and again, as soon as all turned toward 
him, excused himself and said no more.  Anna Pavlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippoly
te's friend, addressed him firmly.  "Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"  H
ippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing.  "Oh, it's nothing. I only wished to 
say..." he wanted to repeat a joke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been t
rying all that evening to get in "I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight
 pour le Roi de Prusse!"  Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken a
s ironical or appreciative according to the way the joke was received. Everybody 
laughed.  "Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna, shak
ing her little shriveled finger at him.  "We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prus
se, but for right principles. Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!" she said.  The c
onversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the political news. It
 became particularly animated toward the end of the evening when the rewards best
owed by the Emperor were mentioned.  "You know N N received a snuffbox with the p
ortrait last year?" said "the man of profound intellect." "Why shouldn't S S get 
the same distinction?"  "Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's portrait is a r
eward but not a distinction," said the diplomatist"a gift, rather."  "There are p
recedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg."  "It's impossible," replied another.  "W
ill you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter...."  When everybody r
ose to go, Helene who had spoken very little all the evening again turned to Bori
s, asking him in a tone of caressing significant command to come to her on Tuesda
y.  "It is of great importance to me," she said, turning with a smile toward Anna
 Pavlovna, and Anna Pavlovna, with the same sad smile with which she spoke of her
 exalted patroness, supported Helene's wish.  It seemed as if from some words Bor
is had spoken that evening about the Prussian army, Helene had suddenly found it 
necessary to see him. She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when
 he came on Tuesday.  But on Tuesday evening, having come to Helene's splendid sa
lon, Boris received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to 
come. There were other guests and the countess talked little to him, and only as 
he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in a whisper, with a str
angely unsmiling face "Come to dinner tomorrow... in the evening. You must come..
.. Come!"  During that stay in Petersburg, Boris became an intimate in the counte
ss' house.      CHAPTER VIII   The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian fro
ntier. Everywhere one heard curses on Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind." Militiam
en and recruits were being enrolled in the villages, and from the seat of war cam
e contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variously interpreted. The lif
e of old Prince Bolkonski, Prince Andrew, and Princess Mary had greatly changed s
ince 1805.  In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief 
then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia. Despite the
 weakness of age, which had become particularly noticeable since the time when he
 thought his son had been killed, he did not think it right to refuse a duty to w
hich he had been appointed by the Emperor himself, and this fresh opportunity for
 action gave him new energy and strength. He was continually traveling through th
e three provinces entrusted to him, was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties
, severe to cruelty with his subordinates, and went into everything down to the m
inutest details himself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics f
rom her father, and when the old prince was at home went to his study with the we
t nurse and little Prince Nicholas as his grandfather called him. The baby Prince
 Nicholas lived with his wet nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess' rooms
 and Princess Mary spent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother's place 
to her little nephew as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed passi
onately fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself to give her fri
end the pleasure of dandling the little angelas she called her nephewand playing 
with him.  Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the
 tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monument brought fr
om Italy, representing an angel with outspread wings ready to fly upwards. The an
gel's upper lip was slightly raised as though about to smile, and once on coming 
out of the chapel Prince Andrew and Princess Mary admitted to one another that th
e angel's face reminded them strangely of the little princess. But what was still
 stranger, though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in t
he expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel's face, Prince Andrew r
ead the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead wife "Ah, why have
 you done this to me?"  Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old prince made ove
r to him a large estate, Bogucharovo, about twentyfive miles from Bald Hills. Par
tly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills, partly because
 Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with his father's peculiariti
es, and partly because he needed solitude, Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo,
 began building and spent most of his time there.  After the Austerlitz campaign 
Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not to continue his military service, and when 
the war recommenced and everybody had to serve, he took a post under his father i
n the recruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and his son seeme
d to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805. The old man, roused by activi
ty, expected the best results from the new campaign, while Prince Andrew on the c
ontrary, taking no part in the war and secretly regretting this, saw only the dar
k side.  On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits. Pri
nce Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father's absence. Little Ni
cholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman who had driven the old prince 
to town returned bringing papers and letters for Prince Andrew.  Not finding the 
young prince in his study the valet went with the letters to Princess Mary's apar
tments, but did not find him there. He was told that the prince had gone to the n
ursery.  "If you please, your excellency, Petrusha has brought some papers," said
 one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a child's little chair
 while, frowning and with trembling hands, he poured drops from a medicine bottle
 into a wineglass half full of water.  "What is it?" he said crossly, and, his ha
nd shaking unintentionally, he poured too many drops into the glass. He threw the
 mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water. The maid brought it.  Ther
e were in the room a child's cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a table, a child's ta
ble, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was sitting. The curtains were d
rawn, and a single candle was burning on the table, screened by a bound music boo
k so that the light did not fall on the cot.  "My dear," said Princess Mary, addr
essing her brother from beside the cot where she was standing, "better wait a bit
... later..."  "Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep putting things o
ffand this is what comes of it!" said Prince Andrew in an exasperated whisper, ev
idently meaning to wound his sister.  "My dear, really... it's better not to wake
 him... he's asleep," said the princess in a tone of entreaty.  Prince Andrew got
 up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed, wineglass in hand.  "Perhaps we'd re
ally better not wake him," he said hesitating.  "As you please... really... I thi
nk so... but as you please," said Princess Mary, evidently intimidated and confus
ed that her opinion had prevailed. She drew her brother's attention to the maid w
ho was calling him in a whisper.  It was the second night that neither of them ha
d slept, watching the boy who was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting t
heir household doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town, they 
had been trying first one remedy and then another. Worn out by sleeplessness and 
anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and reproached and dispu
ted with each other.  "Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered
 the maid.  Prince Andrew went out.  "Devil take them!" he muttered, and after li
stening to the verbal instructions his father had sent and taking the corresponde
nce and his father's letter, he returned to the nursery.  "Well?" he asked.  "Sti
ll the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl Ivanich always says that sleep is more
 important than anything," whispered Princess Mary with a sigh.  Prince Andrew we
nt up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.  "Confound you and your Karl
 Ivanich!" He took the glass with the drops and again went up to the cot.  "Andre
w, don't!" said Princess Mary.  But he scowled at her angrily though also with su
ffering in his eyes, and stooped glass in hand over the infant.  "But I wish it,"
 he said. "I beg yougive it him!"  Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took 
the glass submissively and calling the nurse began giving the medicine. The child
 screamed hoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and sa
t down on a sofa in the next room.  He still had all the letters in his hand. Ope
ning them mechanically he began reading. The old prince, now and then using abbre
viations, wrote in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows   Have just 
this moment received by special messenger very joyful newsif it's not false. Benn
igsen seems to have obtained a complete victory over Buonaparte at Eylau. In Pete
rsburg everyone is rejoicing, and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable. T
hough he is a GermanI congratulate him! I can't make out what the commander at Ko
rchevoa certain Khandrikovis up to till now the additional men and provisions hav
e not arrived. Gallop off to him at once and say I'll have his head off if everyt
hing is not here in a week. Have received another letter about the PreussischEyla
u battle from Petenkahe took part in itand it's all true. When mischiefmakers don
't meddle even a German beats Buonaparte. He is said to be fleeing in great disor
der. Mind you gallop off to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions!   
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was a closely wri
tten letter of two sheets from Bilibin. He folded it up without reading it and re
read his father's letter, ending with the words "Gallop off to Korchevo and carry
 out instructions!"  "No, pardon me, I won't go now till the child is better," th
ought he, going to the door and looking into the nursery.  Princess Mary was stil
l standing by the cot, gently rocking the baby.  "Ah yes, and what else did he sa
y that's unpleasant?" thought Prince Andrew, recalling his father's letter. "Yes,
 we have gained a victory over Bonaparte, just when I'm not serving. Yes, yes, he
's always poking fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!" And he began reading Bilibin's
 letter which was written in French. He read without understanding half of it, re
ad only to forget, if but for a moment, what he had too long been thinking of so 
painfully to the exclusion of all else.      CHAPTER IX   Bilibin was now at army
 headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, and though he wrote in French and used Fr
ench jests and French idioms, he described the whole campaign with a fearless sel
fcensure and selfderision genuinely Russian. Bilibin wrote that the obligation of
 diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in Prince Andrew a
 reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he had accumulated at 
the sight of all that was being done in the army. The letter was old, having been
 written before the battle at PreussischEylau.  "Since the day of our brilliant s
uccess at Austerlitz," wrote Bilibin, "as you know, my dear prince, I never leave
 headquarters. I have certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well 
for me what I have seen during these last three months is incredible.  "I begin a
b ovo. 'The enemy of the human race,' as you know, attacks the Prussians. The Pru
ssians are our faithful allies who have only betrayed us three times in three yea
rs. We take up their cause, but it turns out that 'the enemy of the human race' p
ays no heed to our fine speeches and in his rude and savage way throws himself on
 the Prussians without giving them time to finish the parade they had begun, and 
in two twists of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in t
he palace at Potsdam.  "'I most ardently desire,' writes the King of Prussia to B
onaparte, 'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in a man
ner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances allowed, I have hastene
d to take all steps to that end. May I have succeeded!' The Prussian generals pri
de themselves on being polite to the French and lay down their arms at the first 
demand.  "The head of the garrison at Glogau, with ten thousand men, asks the Kin
g of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... All this is abso
lutely true.  "In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude
, it turns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more, in war on 
our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We have everything in perfec
t order, only one little thing is lacking, namely, a commander in chief. As it wa
s considered that the Austerlitz success might have been more decisive had the co
mmander in chief not been so young, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of P
rozorovski and Kamenski the latter was preferred. The general comes to us, Suvoro
vlike, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joy and triumph.  "On t
he 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mails are taken to the fie
ld marshal's room, for he likes to do everything himself. I am called in to help 
sort the letters and take those meant for us. The field marshal looks on and wait
s for letters addressed to him. We search, but none are to be found. The field ma
rshal grows impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor
 to Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts into one of his wild furies a
nd rages at everyone and everything, seizes the letters, opens them, and reads th
ose from the Emperor addressed to others. 'Ah! So that's the way they treat me! N
o confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep an eye on me! Very well then! Get along w
ith you!' So he writes the famous order of the day to General Bennigsen  'I am wo
unded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the army. You have brought 
your army corps to Pultusk, routed here it is exposed, and without fuel or forage
, so something must be done, and, as you yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yes
terday, you must think of retreating to our frontierwhich do today.'  "'From all 
my riding,' he writes to the Emperor, 'I have got a saddle sore which, coming aft
er all my previous journeys, quite prevents my riding and commanding so vast an a
rmy, so I have passed on the command to the general next in seniority, Count Buxh
owden, having sent him my whole staff and all that belongs to it, advising him if
 there is a lack of bread, to move farther into the interior of Prussia, for only
 one day's ration of bread remains, and in some regiments none at all, as reporte
d by the division commanders, Ostermann and Sedmoretzki, and all that the peasant
s had has been eaten up. I myself will remain in hospital at Ostrolenka till I re
cover. In regard to which I humbly submit my report, with the information that if
 the army remains in its present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a he
althy man left in it by spring.  "'Grant leave to retire to his country seat to a
n old man who is already in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the gr
eat and glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall await your most gracious p
ermission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of a secretary r
ather than commander in the army. My removal from the army does not produce the s
lightest stira blind man has left it. There are thousands such as I in Russia.'  
"The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all, isn't it log
ical?  "This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasingly inter
esting and entertaining. After the field marshal's departure it appears that we a
re within sight of the enemy and must give battle. Buxhowden is commander in chie
f by seniority, but General Bennigsen does not quite see it more particularly as 
it is he and his corps who are within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit 
by the opportunity to fight a battle 'on his own hand' as the Germans say. He doe
s so. This is the battle of Pultusk, which is considered a great victory but in m
y opinion was nothing of the kind. We civilians, as you know, have a very bad way
 of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. Those who retreat after a battle h
ave lost it is what we say and according to that it is we who lost the battle of 
Pultusk. In short, we retreat after the battle but send a courier to Petersburg w
ith news of a victory, and General Bennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg t
he post of commander in chief as a reward for his victory, does not give up the c
ommand of the army to General Buxhowden. During this interregnum we begin a very 
original and interesting series of maneuvers. Our aim is no longer, as it should 
be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to avoid General Buxhowden who by ri
ght of seniority should be our chief. So energetically do we pursue this aim that
 after crossing an unfordable river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves fro
m our enemy, who at the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden. General Buxhowden 
was all but attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one of
 these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him. Buxhowden pursues uswe scuttle. H
e hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross to the other. At last ou
r enemy. Buxhowden, catches us and attacks. Both generals are angry, and the resu
lt is a challenge on Buxhowden's part and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen's. But at
 the critical moment the courier who carried the news of our victory at Pultusk t
o Petersburg returns bringing our appointment as commander in chief, and our firs
t foe, Buxhowden, is vanquished we can now turn our thoughts to the second, Bonap
arte. But as it turns out, just at that moment a third enemy rises before usnamel
y the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudly demanding bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, 
and whatnot! The stores are empty, the roads impassable. The Orthodox begin looti
ng, and in a way of which our last campaign can give you no idea. Half the regime
nts form bands and scour the countryside and put everything to fire and sword. Th
e inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals overflow with sick, and famine is
 everywhere. Twice the marauders even attack our headquarters, and the commander 
in chief has to ask for a battalion to disperse them. During one of these attacks
 they carried off my empty portmanteau and my dressing gown. The Emperor proposes
 to give all commanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but I much fea
r this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other."  At first Prince Andrew
 read with his eyes only, but after a while, in spite of himself although he knew
 how far it was safe to trust Bilibin, what he had read began to interest him mor
e and more. When he had read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it awa
y. It was not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life out the
re in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his eyes, rubbed his fo
rehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he had read, and listened to 
what was passing in the nursery. Suddenly he thought he heard a strange noise thr
ough the door. He was seized with alarm lest something should have happened to th
e child while he was reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door an
d opened it.  Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from 
him with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot.  "My dear
," he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind him.  As often happe
ns after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he was seized by an unreasoning pan
icit occurred to him that the child was dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to
 confirm this terror.  "All is over," he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on h
is forehead. He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it empty an
d that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the curtain aside and for
 some time his frightened, restless eyes could not find the baby. At last he saw 
him the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the bed with his head lower 
than the pillow, and was smacking his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly.  Pr
ince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he had already lost him.
 He bent over him and, as his sister had taught him, tried with his lips whether 
the child was still feverish. The soft forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched 
the head with his hand even the hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspire
d. He was not dead, but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. Pr
ince Andrew longed to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart, this helpless 
little creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him, gazing at his head and a
t the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket. He heard a rustle behi
nd him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of the cot. He did not look round,
 but still gazing at the infant's face listened to his regular breathing. The dar
k shadow was Princess Mary, who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps, lift
ed the curtain, and dropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew recognized her wit
hout looking and held out his hand to her. She pressed it.  "He has perspired," s
aid Prince Andrew.  "I was coming to tell you so."  The child moved slightly in h
is sleep, smiled, and rubbed his forehead against the pillow.  Prince Andrew look
ed at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain her luminous eyes shone more b
rightly than usual from the tears of joy that were in them. She leaned over to he
r brother and kissed him, slightly catching the curtain of the cot. Each made the
 other a warning gesture and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as 
if not wishing to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all th
e world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away, ruffling his hair against the 
muslin of the curtain.  "Yes, this is the one thing left me now," he said with a 
sigh.      CHAPTER X   Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood, Pierr
e went to the Kiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs, taking wi
th him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to what 
he should do on his estates.  When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards t
o the head office and explained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them t
hat steps would be taken immediately to free his serfsand that till then they wer
e not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing their babies were not to
 be sent to work, assistance was to be given to the serfs, punishments were to be
 admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals, asylums, and schools were to be esta
blished on all the estates. Some of the stewards there were semiliterate foremen 
among them listened with alarm, supposing these words to mean that the young coun
t was displeased with their management and embezzlement of money, some after thei
r first fright were amused by Pierre's lisp and the new words they had not heard 
before, others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked, while the cleverest 
among them, including the chief steward, understood from this speech how they cou
ld best handle the master for their own ends.  The chief steward expressed great 
sympathy with Pierre's intentions, but remarked that besides these changes it wou
ld be necessary to go into the general state of affairs which was far from satisf
actory.  Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, since he had come into an inco
me which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year, Pierre felt h
imself far poorer than when his father had made him an allowance of ten thousand 
rubles. He had a dim perception of the following budget  About 80,000 went in pay
ments on all the estates to the Land Bank, about 30,000 went for the upkeep of th
e estate near Moscow, the town house, and the allowance to the three princesses a
bout 15,000 was given in pensions and the same amount for asylums 150,000 alimony
 was sent to the countess about 70,000 went for interest on debts. The building o
f a new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the last two y
ears, and he did not know how the rest, about 100,000 rubles, was spent, and almo
st every year he was obliged to borrow. Besides this the chief steward wrote ever
y year telling him of fires and bad harvests, or of the necessity of rebuilding f
actories and workshops. So the first task Pierre had to face was one for which he
 had very little aptitude or inclinationpractical business.  He discussed estate 
affairs every day with his chief steward. But he felt that this did not forward m
atters at all. He felt that these consultations were detached from real affairs a
nd did not link up with them or make them move. On the one hand, the chief stewar
d put the state of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the necess
ity of paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor, to wh
ich Pierre did not agree. On the other hand, Pierre demanded that steps should be
 taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met by showing the necessity of f
irst paying off the loans from the Land Bank, and the consequent impossibility of
 a speedy emancipation.  The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but sug
gested selling the forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower down the r
iver, and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible all of which operation
s according to him were connected with such complicated measuresthe removal of in
junctions, petitions, permits, and so onthat Pierre became quite bewildered and o
nly replied  "Yes, yes, do so."  Pierre had none of the practical persistence tha
t would have enabled him to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it 
and only tried to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it. The steward
 for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these consultation
s very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to himself.  In Kiev Pierre fo
und some people he knew, and strangers hastened to make his acquaintance and joyf
ully welcomed the rich newcomer, the largest landowner of the province. Temptatio
ns to Pierre's greatest weaknessthe one to which he had confessed when admitted t
o the Lodgewere so strong that he could not resist them. Again whole days, weeks,
 and months of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much occupied with 
evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him no time for reflection, 
as in Petersburg. Instead of the new life he had hoped to lead he still lived the
 old life, only in new surroundings.  Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre
 realized that he did not fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an ex
ample of moral life, and that of the seven virtues he lacked twomorality and the 
love of death. He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled another of 
the preceptsthat of reforming the human raceand had other virtueslove of his neig
hbor, and especially generosity.  In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to P
etersburg. On the way he intended to visit all his estates and see for himself ho
w far his orders had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God h
ad entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.  The chief steward, who
 considered the young count's attempts almost insaneunprofitable to himself, to t
he count, and to the serfsmade some concessions. Continuing to represent the libe
ration of the serfs as impracticable, he arranged for the erection of large build
ingsschools, hospitals, and asylumson all the estates before the master arrived. 
Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes which he knew Pier
re would not like, but for just such gratefully religious ones, with offerings of
 icons and the bread and salt of hospitality, as, according to his understanding 
of his master, would touch and delude him.  The southern spring, the comfortable 
rapid traveling in a Vienna carriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gla
ddening effect on Pierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more pi
cturesque than the other the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly grat
eful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions, which though
 they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in the depth of his heart. In 
one place the peasants presented him with bread and salt and an icon of Saint Pet
er and Saint Paul, asking permission, as a mark of their gratitude for the benefi
ts he had conferred on them, to build a new chantry to the church at their own ex
pense in honor of Peter and Paul, his patron saints. In another place the women w
ith infants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard work. On a 
third estate the priest, bearing a cross, came to meet him surrounded by children
 whom, by the count's generosity, he was instructing in reading, writing, and rel
igion. On all his estates Pierre saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or
 in course of erection, all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, 
which were soon to be opened. Everywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, according
 to which the serfs' manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the touching t
hanks of deputations of serfs in their fullskirted blue coats.  What Pierre did n
ot know was that the place where they presented him with bread and salt and wishe
d to build a chantry in honor of Peter and Paul was a market village where a fair
 was held on St. Peter's day, and that the richest peasants who formed the deputa
tion had begun the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in t
hat villages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not know that since 
the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land, they did still harde
r work on their own land. He did not know that the priest who met him with the cr
oss oppressed the peasants by his exactions, and that the pupils' parents wept at
 having to let him take their children and secured their release by heavy payment
s. He did not know that the brick buildings, built to plan, were being built by s
erfs whose manorial labor was thus increased, though lessened on paper. He did no
t know that where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs' payme
nts had been diminished by a third, their obligatory manorial work had been incre
ased by a half. And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to his estates and qui
te recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had left Petersburg, and wrote en
thusiastic letters to his "brotherinstructor" as he called the Grand Master.  "Ho
w easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much good," thought Pierre, "a
nd how little attention we pay to it!"  He was pleased at the gratitude he receiv
ed, but felt abashed at receiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much mor
e he might do for these simple, kindly people.  The chief steward, a very stupid 
but cunning man who saw perfectly through the naive and intelligent count and pla
yed with him as with a toy, seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on
 Pierre, pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all 
the uselessness of freeing the serfs, who were quite happy as it was.  Pierre in 
his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be difficult to imagine hap
pier people, and that God only knew what would happen to them when they were free
, but he insisted, though reluctantly, on what he thought right. The steward prom
ised to do all in his power to carry out the count's wishes, seeing clearly that 
not only would the count never be able to find out whether all measures had been 
taken for the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank
, but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the newly erect
ed buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued to give in money an
d work all that other people's serfs gavethat is to say, all that could be got ou
t of them.      CHAPTER XI   Returning from his journey through South Russia in t
he happiest state of mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of vis
iting his friend Bolkonski, whom he had not seen for two years.  Bogucharovo lay 
in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields and forests of fir and b
irch, which were partly cut down. The house lay behind a newly dug pond filled wi
th water to the brink and with banks still bare of grass. It was at the end of a 
village that stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which 
were a few fir trees.  The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, s
tables, a bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular facade st
ill in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newly laid out. The f
ences and gates were new and solid two fire pumps and a water cart, painted green
, stood in a shed the paths were straight, the bridges were strong and had handra
ils. Everything bore an impress of tidiness and good management. Some domestic se
rfs Pierre met, in reply to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a
 small newly built lodge close to the pond. Anton, a man who had looked after Pri
nce Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, said that the princ
e was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.  Pierre was struck by
 the modesty of the small though clean house after the brilliant surroundings in 
which he had last met his friend in Petersburg.  He quickly entered the small rec
eption room with its stillunplastered wooden walls redolent of pine, and would ha
ve gone farther, but Anton ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.  "Well, wha
t is it?" came a sharp, unpleasant voice.  "A visitor," answered Anton.  "Ask him
 to wait," and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed back.  Pierre went wit
h rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to face with Prince Andrew, who 
came out frowning and looking old. Pierre embraced him and lifting his spectacles
 kissed his friend on the cheek and looked at him closely.  "Well, I did not expe
ct you, I am very glad," said Prince Andrew.  Pierre said nothing he looked fixed
ly at his friend with surprise. He was struck by the change in him. His words wer
e kindly and there was a smile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull and l
ifeless and in spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous
 and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner, paler, and more manlylooking,
 but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used to it were his inertia and
 a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolonged concentration on some one thought.  A
s is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation, it was lo
ng before their conversation could settle on anything. They put questions and gav
e brief replies about things they knew ought to be talked over at length. At last
 the conversation gradually settled on some of the topics at first lightly touche
d on their past life, plans for the future, Pierre's journeys and occupations, th
e war, and so on. The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in h
is friend's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile with which he 
listened to Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyful animation of the past or
 the future. It was as if Prince Andrew would have liked to sympathize with what 
Pierre was saying, but could not. The latter began to feel that it was in bad tas
te to speak of his enthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Pr
ince Andrew's presence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views, which ha
d been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour. He checked himself
, fearing to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistible desire to show his friend as
 soon as possible that he was now a quite different, and better, Pierre than he h
ad been in Petersburg.  "I can't tell you how much I have lived through since the
n. I hardly know myself again."  "Yes, we have altered much, very much, since the
n," said Prince Andrew.  "Well, and you? What are your plans?"  "Plans!" repeated
 Prince Andrew ironically. "My plans?" he said, as if astonished at the word. "We
ll, you see, I'm building. I mean to settle here altogether next year...."  Pierr
e looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew's face, which had grown much
 older.  "No, I meant to ask..." Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted him.
  "But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about your travels and all you
 have been doing on your estates."  Pierre began describing what he had done on h
is estates, trying as far as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements
 that had been made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre's story of what 
he had been doing, as though it were all an oldtime story, and he listened not on
ly without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was telling him.  Pierr
e felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's company and at last becam
e silent.  "I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, who evidentl
y also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, "I am only bivouacking he
re and have just come to look round. I am going back to my sister today. I will i
ntroduce you to her. But of course you know her already," he said, evidently tryi
ng to entertain a visitor with whom he now found nothing in common. "We will go a
fter dinner. And would you now like to look round my place?"  They went out and w
alked about till dinnertime, talking of the political news and common acquaintanc
es like people who do not know each other intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with so
me animation and interest only of the new homestead he was constructing and its b
uildings, but even here, while on the scaffolding, in the midst of a talk explain
ing the future arrangements of the house, he interrupted himself  "However, this 
is not at all interesting. Let us have dinner, and then we'll set off."  At dinne
r, conversation turned on Pierre's marriage.  "I was very much surprised when I h
eard of it," said Prince Andrew.  Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was me
ntioned, and said hurriedly "I will tell you some time how it all happened. But y
ou know it is all over, and forever."  "Forever?" said Prince Andrew. "Nothing's 
forever."  "But you know how it all ended, don't you? You heard of the duel?"  "A
nd so you had to go through that too!"  "One thing I thank God for is that I did 
not kill that man," said Pierre.  "Why so?" asked Prince Andrew. "To kill a vicio
us dog is a very good thing really."  "No, to kill a man is badwrong."  "Why is i
t wrong?" urged Prince Andrew. "It is not given to man to know what is right and 
what is wrong. Men always did and always will err, and in nothing more than in wh
at they consider right and wrong."  "What does harm to another is wrong," said Pi
erre, feeling with pleasure that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andr
ew was roused, had begun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought him to h
is present state.  "And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked. 
 "Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know what is bad for ourselves."  "Yes, we
 know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself is something I cannot inflic
t on others," said Prince Andrew, growing more and more animated and evidently wi
shing to express his new outlook to Pierre. He spoke in French. "I only know two 
very real evils in life remorse and illness. The only good is the absence of thos
e evils. To live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy now."
  "And love of one's neighbor, and selfsacrifice?" began Pierre. "No, I can't agr
ee with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not to have to repent is not e
nough. I lived like that, I lived for myself and ruined my life. And only now whe
n I am living, or at least trying" Pierre's modesty made him correct himself "to 
live for others, only now have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I shal
l not agree with you, and you do not really believe what you are saying." Prince 
Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.  "When you see my sister, 
Princess Mary, you'll get on with her," he said. "Perhaps you are right for yours
elf," he added after a short pause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You lived
 for yourself and say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when y
ou began living for others. I experienced just the reverse. I lived for glory.And
 after all what is glory? The same love of others, a desire to do something for t
hem, a desire for their approval.So I lived for others, and not almost, but quite
, ruined my life. And I have become calmer since I began to live only for myself.
"  "But what do you mean by living only for yourself?" asked Pierre, growing exci
ted. "What about your son, your sister, and your father?"  "But that's just the s
ame as myselfthey are not others," explained Prince Andrew. "The others, one's ne
ighbors, le prochain, as you and Princess Mary call it, are the chief source of a
ll error and evil. Le prochainyour Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good."  A
nd he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. He evidently wishe
d to draw him on.  "You are joking," replied Pierre, growing more and more excite
d. "What error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and even doing a li
ttlethough I did very little and did it very badly? What evil can there be in it 
if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like ourselves, were growing up and dyin
g with no idea of God and truth beyond ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are
 now instructed in a comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, a
nd consolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dying of dise
ase without help while material assistance could so easily be rendered, and I sup
plied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylum for the aged? And is it not a
 palpable, unquestionable good if a peasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest 
day or night and I give them rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and lisping
. "And I have done that though badly and to a small extent but I have done someth
ing toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a good action, and more 
than that, you can't make me believe that you do not think so yourself. And the m
ain thing is," he continued, "that I know, and know for certain, that the enjoyme
nt of doing this good is the only sure happiness in life."  "Yes, if you put it l
ike that it's quite a different matter," said Prince Andrew. "I build a house and
 lay out a garden, and you build hospitals. The one and the other may serve as a 
pastime. But what's right and what's good must be judged by one who knows all, bu
t not by us. Well, you want an argument," he added, "come on then."  They rose fr
om the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served as a veranda.  "Come
, let's argue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools," he went on, crook
ing a finger, "education and so forth that is, you want to raise him" pointing to
 a peasant who passed by them taking off his cap "from his animal condition and a
waken in him spiritual needs, while it seems to me that animal happiness is the o
nly happiness possible, and that is just what you want to deprive him of. I envy 
him, but you want to make him what I am, without giving him my means. Then you sa
y, 'lighten his toil.' But as I see it, physical labor is as essential to him, as
 much a condition of his existence, as mental activity is to you or me. You can't
 help thinking. I go to bed after two in the morning, thoughts come and I can't s
leep but toss about till dawn, because I think and can't help thinking, just as h
e can't help plowing and mowing if he didn't, he would go to the drink shop or fa
ll ill. Just as I could not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of i
t in a week, so he could not stand my physical idleness, but would grow fat and d
ie. The third thingwhat else was it you talked about?" and Prince Andrew crooked 
a third finger. "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit, he is dying, and you
 come and bleed him and patch him up. He will drag about as a cripple, a burden t
o everybody, for another ten years. It would be far easier and simpler for him to
 die. Others are being born and there are plenty of them as it is. It would be di
fferent if you grudged losing a laborerthat's how I regard himbut you want to cur
e him from love of him. And he does not want that. And besides, what a notion tha
t medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" said he, frowning angrily and tu
rning away from Pierre.  Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinc
tly that it was evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he s
poke readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time. His glanc
e became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless.  "Oh, that is dre
adful, dreadful!" said Pierre. "I don't understand how one can live with such ide
as. I had such moments myself not long ago, in Moscow and when traveling, but at 
such times I collapsed so that I don't live at alleverything seems hateful to me.
.. myself most of all. Then I don't eat, don't wash... and how is it with you?...
"  "Why not wash? That is not cleanly," said Prince Andrew "on the contrary one m
ust try to make one's life as pleasant as possible. I'm alive, that is not my fau
lt, so I must live out my life as best I can without hurting others."  "But with 
such ideas what motive have you for living? One would sit without moving, underta
king nothing...."  "Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to do
 nothing, but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor to c
hoose me to be their marshal it was all I could do to get out of it. They could n
ot understand that I have not the necessary qualifications for itthe kind of good
natured, fussy shallowness necessary for the position. Then there's this house, w
hich must be built in order to have a nook of one's own in which to be quiet. And
 now there's this recruiting."  "Why aren't you serving in the army?"  "After Aus
terlitz!" said Prince Andrew gloomily. "No, thank you very much! I have promised 
myself not to serve again in the active Russian army. And I won'tnot even if Bona
parte were here at Smolensk threatening Bald Hillseven then I wouldn't serve in t
he Russian army! Well, as I was saying," he continued, recovering his composure, 
"now there's this recruiting. My father is chief in command of the Third District
, and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under him."  "Then you a
re serving?"  "I am."  He paused a little while.  "And why do you serve?"  "Why, 
for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men of his time. But he 
is growing old, and though not exactly cruel he has too energetic a character. He
 is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is terrible, and now he has this aut
hority of a commander in chief of the recruiting, granted by the Emperor. If I ha
d been two hours late a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster's clerk at Yu
khnovna hanged," said Prince Andrew with a smile. "So I am serving because I alon
e have any influence with my father, and now and then can save him from actions w
hich would torment him afterwards."  "Well, there you see!"  "Yes, but it is not 
as you imagine," Prince Andrew continued. "I did not, and do not, in the least ca
re about that scoundrel of a clerk who had stolen some boots from the recruits I 
should even have been very glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my fathert
hat again is for myself."  Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes gl
ittered feverishly while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there wa
s no desire to do good to his neighbor.  "There now, you wish to liberate your se
rfs," he continued "that is a very good thing, but not for youI don't suppose you
 ever had anyone flogged or sent to Siberiaand still less for your serfs. If they
 are beaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don't suppose they are any the worse 
off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the stripes on their bodies h
eal, and they are happy as before. But it is a good thing for proprietors who per
ish morally, bring remorse upon themselves, stifle this remorse and grow callous,
 as a result of being able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is thos
e people I pity, and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You may 
not have seen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in those traditions of un
limited power, in time when they grow more irritable, become cruel and harsh, are
 conscious of it, but cannot restrain themselves and grow more and more miserable
."  Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking that the
se thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father's case.  He did not
 reply.  "So that's what I'm sorry forhuman dignity, peace of mind, purity, and n
ot the serfs' backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave as you may, always remai
n the same backs and foreheads."  "No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agr
ee with you," said Pierre.      CHAPTER XII   In the evening Andrew and Pierre go
t into the open carriage and drove to Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pier
re, broke the silence now and then with remarks which showed that he was in a goo
d temper.  Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was making in 
his husbandry.  Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables and a
pparently immersed in his own thoughts.  He was thinking that Prince Andrew was u
nhappy, had gone astray, did not see the true light, and that he, Pierre, ought t
o aid, enlighten, and raise him. But as soon as he thought of what he should say,
 he felt that Prince Andrew with one word, one argument, would upset all his teac
hing, and he shrank from beginning, afraid of exposing to possible ridicule what 
to him was precious and sacred.  "No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly b
egan, lowering his head and looking like a bull about to charge, "why do you thin
k so? You should not think so."  "Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with su
rprise.  "About life, about man's destiny. It can't be so. I myself thought like 
that, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't smile. Freemasonry is
 not a religious ceremonial sect, as I thought it was Freemasonry is the best exp
ression of the best, the eternal, aspects of humanity."  And he began to explain 
Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince Andrew. He said that Freemasonry is the
 teaching of Christianity freed from the bonds of State and Church, a teaching of
 equality, brotherhood, and love.  "Only our holy brotherhood has the real meanin
g of life, all the rest is a dream," said Pierre. "Understand, my dear fellow, th
at outside this union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with yo
u that nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out his life, 
like you, merely trying not to harm others. But make our fundamental convictions 
your own, join our brotherhood, give yourself up to us, let yourself be guided, a
nd you will at once feel yourself, as I have felt myself, a part of that vast inv
isible chain the beginning of which is hidden in heaven," said Pierre.  Prince An
drew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silence to Pierre's words. Mo
re than once, when the noise of the wheels prevented his catching what Pierre sai
d, he asked him to repeat it, and by the peculiar glow that came into Prince Andr
ew's eyes and by his silence, Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that
 Prince Andrew would not interrupt him or laugh at what he said.  They reached a 
river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to cross by ferry. While t
he carriage and horses were being placed on it, they also stepped on the raft.  P
rince Andrew, leaning his arms on the raft railing, gazed silently at the floodin
g waters glittering in the setting sun.  "Well, what do you think about it?" Pier
re asked. "Why are you silent?"  "What do I think about it? I am listening to you
. It's all very well.... You say join our brotherhood and we will show you the ai
m of life, the destiny of man, and the laws which govern the world. But who are w
e? Men. How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not see what you see? You s
ee a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but I don't see it."  Pierre interrupt
ed him.  "Do you believe in a future life?" he asked.  "A future life?" Prince An
drew repeated, but Pierre, giving him no time to reply, took the repetition for a
 denial, the more readily as he knew Prince Andrew's former atheistic convictions
.  "You say you can't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth. Nor could I, an
d it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end of everything. On ea
rth, here on this earth" Pierre pointed to the fields, "there is no truth, all is
 false and evil but in the universe, in the whole universe there is a kingdom of 
truth, and we who are now the children of earth areeternallychildren of the whole
 universe. Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole? 
Don't I feel that I form one link, one step, between the lower and higher beings,
 in this vast harmonious multitude of beings in whom the Deitythe Supreme Power i
f you prefer the termis manifest? If I see, clearly see, that ladder leading from
 plant to man, why should I suppose it breaks off at me and does not go farther a
nd farther? I feel that I cannot vanish, since nothing vanishes in this world, bu
t that I shall always exist and always have existed. I feel that beyond me and ab
ove me there are spirits, and that in this world there is truth."  "Yes, that is 
Herder's theory," said Prince Andrew, "but it is not that which can convince me, 
dear friendlife and death are what convince. What convinces is when one sees a be
ing dear to one, bound up with one's own life, before whom one was to blame and h
ad hoped to make it right" Prince Andrew's voice trembled and he turned away, "an
d suddenly that being is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases to exist.... Why? 
It cannot be that there is no answer. And I believe there is.... That's what conv
inces, that is what has convinced me," said Prince Andrew.  "Yes, yes, of course,
" said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm saying?"  "No. All I say is that it is not ar
gument that convinces me of the necessity of a future life, but this when you go 
hand in hand with someone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowher
e, and you yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in. And I have looked in
...."  "Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is a Someo
ne? There is the future life. The Someone isGod."  Prince Andrew did not reply. T
he carriage and horses had long since been taken off, onto the farther bank, and 
reharnessed. The sun had sunk half below the horizon and an evening frost was sta
rring the puddles near the ferry, but Pierre and Andrew, to the astonishment of t
he footmen, coachmen, and ferrymen, still stood on the raft and talked.  "If ther
e is a God and future life, there is truth and good, and man's highest happiness 
consists in striving to attain them. We must live, we must love, and we must beli
eve that we live not only today on this scrap of earth, but have lived and shall 
live forever, there, in the Whole," said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.  Prin
ce Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening to Pierre, and he ga
zed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the sun gleaming on the blue wat
ers. There was perfect stillness. Pierre became silent. The raft had long since s
topped and only the waves of the current beat softly against it below. Prince And
rew felt as if the sound of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words, whispe
ring  "It is true, believe it."  He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike
, tender look at Pierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his sup
erior friend.  "Yes, if it only were so!" said Prince Andrew. "However, it is tim
e to get on," he added, and, stepping off the raft, he looked up at the sky to wh
ich Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since Austerlitz saw that high, ev
erlasting sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield and something that had 
long been slumbering, something that was best within him, suddenly awoke, joyful 
and youthful, in his soul. It vanished as soon as he returned to the customary co
nditions of his life, but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to 
develop existed within him. His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in Prince And
rew's life. Though outwardly he continued to live in the same old way, inwardly h
e began a new life.      CHAPTER XIII   It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew an
d Pierre drove up to the front entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they appro
ached the house, Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre's attention to a commotio
n going on at the back porch. A woman, bent with age, with a wallet on her back, 
and a short, longhaired, young man in a black garment had rushed back to the gate
 on seeing the carriage driving up. Two women ran out after them, and all four, l
ooking round at the carriage, ran in dismay up the steps of the back porch.  "Tho
se are Mary's 'God's folk,'" said Prince Andrew. "They have mistaken us for my fa
ther. This is the one matter in which she disobeys him. He orders these pilgrims 
to be driven away, but she receives them."  "But what are 'God's folk'?" asked Pi
erre.  Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them, a
nd he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected back soon.  The 
old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute.  Prince Andrew 
led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always kept in perfect order and rea
diness for him in his father's house he himself went to the nursery.  "Let us go 
and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned. "I have not found her yet
, she is hiding now, sitting with her 'God's folk.' It will serve her right, she 
will be confused, but you will see her 'God's folk.' It's really very curious."  
"What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.  "Come, and you'll see for yourself."  Pri
ncess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face when they wen
t in. In her snug room, with lamps burning before the icon stand, a young lad wit
h a long nose and long hair, wearing a monk's cassock, sat on the sofa beside her
, behind a samovar. Near them, in an armchair, sat a thin, shriveled, old woman, 
with a meek expression on her childlike face.  "Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" 
said the princess, with mild reproach, as she stood before her pilgrims like a he
n before her chickens.  "Charmee de vous voir. Je suis tres contente de vous voir
," * she said to Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child, and 
now his friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife, and above all his k
indly, simple face disposed her favorably toward him. She looked at him with her 
beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say, "I like you very much, but please don't
 laugh at my people." After exchanging the first greetings, they sat down.       
* "Delighted to see you. I am very glad to see you."   "Ah, and Ivanushka is here
 too!" said Prince Andrew, glancing with a smile at the young pilgrim.  "Andrew!"
 said Princess Mary, imploringly. "Il faut que vous sachiez que c'est une femme,"
 * said Prince Andrew to Pierre.  "Andrew, au nom de Dieu!" *2 Princess Mary repe
ated.        * "You must know that this is a woman."       * 2 "For heaven's sake
."   It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical tone toward the pilgrims and Pr
incess Mary's helpless attempts to protect them were their customary longestablis
hed relations on the matter.  "Mais, ma bonne amie," said Prince Andrew, "vous de
vriez au contraire m'etre reconnaissante de ce que j'explique a Pierre votre inti
mite avec ce jeune homme." *        * "But, my dear, you ought on the contrary to
 be grateful to      me for explaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young   
   man."   "Really?" said Pierre, gazing over his spectacles with curiosity and s
eriousness for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him into Ivanushka's
 face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about, looked round at them all with
 crafty eyes.  Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quite un
necessary. They were not in the least abashed. The old woman, lowering her eyes b
ut casting side glances at the newcomers, had turned her cup upside down and plac
ed a nibbled bit of sugar beside it, and sat quietly in her armchair, though hopi
ng to be offered another cup of tea. Ivanushka, sipping out of her saucer, looked
 with sly womanish eyes from under her brows at the young men.  "Where have you b
een? To Kiev?" Prince Andrew asked the old woman.  "I have, good sir," she answer
ed garrulously. "Just at Christmastime I was deemed worthy to partake of the holy
 and heavenly sacrament at the shrine of the saint. And now I'm from Kolyazin, ma
ster, where a great and wonderful blessing has been revealed."  "And was Ivanushk
a with you?"  "I go by myself, benefactor," said Ivanushka, trying to speak in a 
bass voice. "I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo..."  Pelageya interrupted he
r companion she evidently wished to tell what she had seen.  "In Kolyazin, master
, a wonderful blessing has been revealed."  "What is it? Some new relics?" asked 
Prince Andrew.  "Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. "Don't tell him, Pela
geya."  "No... why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him. He is kind, he is o
ne of God's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten rubles, I remember. Wh
en I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me he's one of God's own and goes barefoot 
summer and winter, he says, 'Why are you not going to the right place? Go to Koly
azin where a wonderworking icon of the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.' On 
hearing those words I said goodby to the holy folk and went."  All were silent, o
nly the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones, drawing in her breath.  "So I co
me, master, and the people say to me 'A great blessing has been revealed, holy oi
l trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, the Holy Virgin Mother of God'.
..."  "All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards," said Princess Mary, flu
shing.  "Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see it yourselves?" he inquired. 
 "Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a brightness on the face like the lig
ht of heaven, and from the blessed Mother's cheek it drops and drops...."  "But, 
dear me, that must be a fraud!" said Pierre, naively, who had listened attentivel
y to the pilgrim.  "Oh, master, what are you saying?" exclaimed the horrified Pel
ageya, turning to Princess Mary for support.  "They impose on the people," he rep
eated.  "Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilgrim woman, crossing herself. "Oh, 
don't speak so, master! There was a general who did not believe, and said, 'The m
onks cheat,' and as soon as he'd said it he went blind. And he dreamed that the H
oly Virgin Mother of the Kiev catacombs came to him and said, 'Believe in me and 
I will make you whole.' So he begged 'Take me to her, take me to her.' It's the r
eal truth I'm telling you, I saw it myself. So he was brought, quite blind, strai
ght to her, and he goes up to her and falls down and says, 'Make me whole,' says 
he, 'and I'll give thee what the Tsar bestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, t
he star is fixed into the icon. Well, and what do you think? He received his sigh
t! It's a sin to speak so. God will punish you," she said admonishingly, turning 
to Pierre.  "How did the star get into the icon?" Pierre asked.  "And was the Hol
y Mother promoted to the rank of general?" said Prince Andrew, with a smile.  Pel
ageya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands.  "Oh, master, master, what 
a sin! And you who have a son!" she began, her pallor suddenly turning to a vivid
 red. "Master, what have you said? God forgive you!" And she crossed herself. "Lo
rd forgive him! My dear, what does it mean?..." she asked, turning to Princess Ma
ry. She got up and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. She evidently fel
t frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where such things co
uld be said, and was at the same time sorry to have now to forgo the charity of t
his house.  "Now, why need you do it?" said Princess Mary. "Why did you come to m
e?..."  "Come, Pelageya, I was joking," said Pierre. "Princesse, ma parole, je n'
ai pas voulu l'offenser. * I did not mean anything, I was only joking," he said, 
smiling shyly and trying to efface his offense. "It was all my fault, and Andrew 
was only joking."       * "Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her."  
 Pelageya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre's face there was such a look of since
re penitence, and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at her and now at Pierre, t
hat she was gradually reassured.      CHAPTER XIV   The pilgrim woman was appease
d and, being encouraged to talk, gave a long account of Father Amphilochus, who l
ed so holy a life that his hands smelled of incense, and how on her last visit to
 Kiev some monks she knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, ta
king some dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with the sain
ts. "I'd pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on to another. I'd sleep a bi
t and then again go and kiss the relics, and there was such peace all around, suc
h blessedness, that one don't want to come out, even into the light of heaven aga
in."  Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew went out of
 the room, and then, leaving "God's folk" to finish their tea, Princess Mary took
 Pierre into the drawing room.  "You are very kind," she said to him.  "Oh, I rea
lly did not mean to hurt her feelings. I understand them so well and have the gre
atest respect for them."  Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affecti
onately.  "I have known you a long time, you see, and am as fond of you as of a b
rother," she said. "How do you find Andrew?" she added hurriedly, not giving him 
time to reply to her affectionate words. "I am very anxious about him. His health
 was better in the winter, but last spring his wound reopened and the doctor said
 he ought to go away for a cure. And I am also very much afraid for him spiritual
ly. He has not a character like us women who, when we suffer, can weep away our s
orrows. He keeps it all within him. Today he is cheerful and in good spirits, but
 that is the effect of your visithe is not often like that. If you could persuade
 him to go abroad. He needs activity, and this quiet regular life is very bad for
 him. Others don't notice it, but I see it."  Toward ten o'clock the men servants
 rushed to the front door, hearing the bells of the old prince's carriage approac
hing. Prince Andrew and Pierre also went out into the porch.  "Who's that?" asked
 the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got out of the carriage.  "Ah! Very glad! 
Kiss me," he said, having learned who the young stranger was.  The old prince was
 in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre.  Before supper, Prince Andrew, com
ing back to his father's study, found him disputing hotly with his visitor. Pierr
e was maintaining that a time would come when there would be no more wars. The ol
d prince disputed it chaffingly, but without getting angry.  "Drain the blood fro
m men's veins and put in water instead, then there will be no more war! Old women
's nonsenseold women's nonsense!" he repeated, but still he patted Pierre affecti
onately on the shoulder, and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew, evide
ntly not wishing to join in the conversation, was looking over the papers his fat
her had brought from town. The old prince went up to him and began to talk busine
ss.  "The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his contingent. He came to to
wn and wanted to invite me to dinnerI gave him a pretty dinner!... And there, loo
k at this.... Well, my boy," the old prince went on, addressing his son and patti
ng Pierre on the shoulder. "A fine fellowyour friendI like him! He stirs me up. A
nother says clever things and one doesn't care to listen, but this one talks rubb
ish yet stirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get along! Perhaps I'll come and sit wi
th you at supper. We'll have another dispute. Make friends with my little fool, P
rincess Mary," he shouted after Pierre, through the door.  Only now, on his visit
 to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize the strength and charm of his friendship
 with Prince Andrew. That charm was not expressed so much in his relations with h
im as with all his family and with the household. With the stern old prince and t
he gentle, timid Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once
 felt like an old friend. They were all fond of him already. Not only Princess Ma
ry, who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him her most radia
nt looks, but even the oneyearold "Prince Nicholas" as his grandfather called him
 smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in his arms, and Michael Ivanovich and
 Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at him with pleasant smiles when he talked to the 
old prince.  The old prince came in to supper this was evidently on Pierre's acco
unt. And during the two days of the young man's visit he was extremely kind to hi
m and told him to visit them again.  When Pierre had gone and the members of the 
household met together, they began to express their opinions of him as people alw
ays do after a new acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anyt
hing but what was good of him.      CHAPTER XV   When returning from his leave, R
ostov felt, for the first time, how close was the bond that united him to Denisov
 and the whole regiment.  On approaching it, Rostov felt as he had done when appr
oaching his home in Moscow. When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned unif
orm of his regiment, when he recognized redhaired Dementyev and saw the picket ro
pes of the roan horses, when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to his master, "The coun
t has come!" and Denisov, who had been asleep on his bed, ran all disheveled out 
of the mud hut to embrace him, and the officers collected round to greet the new 
arrival, Rostov experienced the same feeling as when his mother, his father, and 
his sister had embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could not spe
ak. The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and precious as his par
ents' house.  When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and h
ad been reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and had gone out fora
ging, when he had again entered into all the little interests of the regiment and
 felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in one narrow, unchanging frame, he e
xperienced the same sense of peace, of moral support, and the same sense of being
 at home here in his own place, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here 
was none of all that turmoil of the world at large, where he did not know his rig
ht place and took mistaken decisions here was no Sonya with whom he ought, or oug
ht not, to have an explanation here was no possibility of going there or not goin
g there here there were not twentyfour hours in the day which could be spent in s
uch a variety of ways there was not that innumerable crowd of people of whom not 
one was nearer to him or farther from him than another there were none of those u
ncertain and undefined money relations with his father, and nothing to recall tha
t terrible loss to Dolokhov. Here, in the regiment, all was clear and simple. The
 whole world was divided into two unequal parts one, our Pavlograd regiment the o
ther, all the rest. And the rest was no concern of his. In the regiment, everythi
ng was definite who was lieutenant, who captain, who was a good fellow, who a bad
 one, and most of all, who was a comrade. The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one'
s pay came every four months, there was nothing to think out or decide, you had o
nly to do nothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and, when giv
en an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitely orderedand all wo
uld be well.  Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regim
ental life, Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down to res
t. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was all the pleasanter for him, be
cause, after his loss to Dolokhov for which, in spite of all his family's efforts
 to console him, he could not forgive himself, he had made up his mind to atone f
or his fault by serving, not as he had done before, but really well, and by being
 a perfectly firstrate comrade and officerin a word, a splendid man altogether, a
 thing which seemed so difficult out in the world, but so possible in the regimen
t.  After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parents in fi
ve years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now resolved to take only t
wo thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to his parents.  Our army, after
 repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultusk and PreussischEylau, was c
oncentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaiting the Emperor's arrival and the begin
ning of a new campaign.  The Pavlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the ar
my which had served in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength in R
ussia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of the campaign. It
 had been neither at Pultusk nor at PreussischEylau and, when it joined the army 
in the field in the second half of the campaign, was attached to Platov's divisio
n.  Platov's division was acting independently of the main army. Several times pa
rts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with the enemy, had taken priso
ners, and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot's carriages. In April the Pavlog
rads were stationed immovably for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted G
erman village.  A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river br
oke, and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions for the men nor
 fodder for the horses had been issued. As no transports could arrive, the men di
spersed about the abandoned and deserted villages, searching for potatoes, but fo
und few even of these.  Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all 
fledif any remained, they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be taken
 from them even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of taking anything
 from them, often gave them the last of their rations.  The Pavlograd regiment ha
d had only two men wounded in action, but had lost nearly half its men from hunge
r and sickness. In the hospitals, death was so certain that soldiers suffering fr
om fever, or the swelling that came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, a
nd hardly able to drag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals.
 When spring came on, the soldiers found a plant just showing out of the ground t
hat looked like asparagus, which, for some reason, they called "Mashka's sweet ro
ot." It was very bitter, but they wandered about the fields seeking it and dug it
 out with their sabers and ate it, though they were ordered not to do so, as it w
as a noxious plant. That spring a new disease broke out among the soldiers, a swe
lling of the arms, legs, and face, which the doctors attributed to eating this ro
ot. But in spite of all this, the soldiers of Denisov's squadron fed chiefly on "
Mashka's sweet root," because it was the second week that the last of the biscuit
s were being doled out at the rate of half a pound a man and the last potatoes re
ceived had sprouted and frozen.  The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on 
straw from the thatched roofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered 
with tufts of felty winter hair.  Despite this destitution, the soldiers and offi
cers went on living just as usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered 
uniforms, the hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomed th
eir horses, polished their arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs in plac
e of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which they rose up hung
ry, joking about their nasty food and their hunger. As usual, in their spare time
, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves before them naked smoked, picked out and 
baked sprouting rotten potatoes, told and listened to stories of Potemkin's and S
uvorov's campaigns, or to legends of Alesha the Sly, or the priest's laborer Miko
lka.  The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless, halfruine
d houses. The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and, in general, food f
or the men. The younger ones occupied themselves as before, some playing cards th
ere was plenty of money, though there was no food, some with more innocent games,
 such as quoits and skittles. The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken
 of, partly because nothing certain was known about it, partly because there was 
a vague feeling that in the main it was going badly.  Rostov lived, as before, wi
th Denisov, and since their furlough they had become more friendly than ever. Den
isov never spoke of Rostov's family, but by the tender friendship his commander s
howed him, Rostov felt that the elder hussar's luckless love for Natasha played a
 part in strengthening their friendship. Denisov evidently tried to expose Rostov
 to danger as seldom as possible, and after an action greeted his safe return wit
h evident joy. On one of his foraging expeditions, in a deserted and ruined villa
ge to which he had come in search of provisions, Rostov found a family consisting
 of an old Pole and his daughter with an infant in arms. They were half clad, hun
gry, too weak to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance. Ros
tov brought them to his quarters, placed them in his own lodging, and kept them f
or some weeks while the old man was recovering. One of his comrades, talking of w
omen, began chaffing Rostov, saying that he was more wily than any of them and th
at it would not be a bad thing if he introduced to them the pretty Polish girl he
 had saved. Rostov took the joke as an insult, flared up, and said such unpleasan
t things to the officer that it was all Denisov could do to prevent a duel. When 
the officer had gone away, Denisov, who did not himself know what Rostov's relati
ons with the Polish girl might be, began to upbraid him for his quickness of temp
er, and Rostov replied  "Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I 
can't tell you how it offended me... because... well, for that reason...."  Denis
ov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the room without looking a
t Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.  "Ah, what a mad bweed you W
ostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostov noticed tears in his eyes.      CHAPTER XVI 
  In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival, but Rostov
 had no chance of being present at the review he held at Bartenstein, as the Pavl
ograds were at the outposts far beyond that place.  They were bivouacking. Deniso
v and Rostov were living in an earth hut, dug out for them by the soldiers and ro
ofed with branches and turf. The hut was made in the following manner, which had 
then come into vogue. A trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feet eigh
t inches deep, and eight feet long. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out 
and these formed the entrance and vestibule. The trench itself was the room, in w
hich the lucky ones, such as the squadron commander, had a board, lying on piles 
at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. On each side of the trench
, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about two and a half feet, and this did d
uty for bedsteads and couches. The roof was so constructed that one could stand u
p in the middle of the trench and could even sit up on the beds if one drew close
 to the table. Denisov, who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his sq
uadron liked him, had also a board in the roof at the farther end, with a piece o
f broken but mended glass in it for a window. When it was very cold, embers from 
the soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron on the steps in the "r
eception room"as Denisov called that part of the hutand it was then so warm that 
the officers, of whom there were always some with Denisov and Rostov, sat in thei
r shirt sleeves.  In April, Rostov was on orderly duty. One morning, between seve
n and eight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, changed his r
ainsoaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, got warm, then tidied up the
 things on the table and in his own corner, and, his face glowing from exposure t
o the wind and with nothing on but his shirt, lay down on his back, putting his a
rms under his head. He was pleasantly considering the probability of being promot
ed in a few days for his last reconnoitering expedition, and was awaiting Denisov
, who had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.  Suddenly he heard D
enisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut, evidently much excited. Rost
ov moved to the window to see whom he was speaking to, and saw the quartermaster,
 Topcheenko.  "I ordered you not to let them eat that Mashka woot stuff!" Denisov
 was shouting. "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought some fwom the fi
elds."  "I have given the order again and again, your honor, but they don't obey,
" answered the quartermaster.  Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought compl
acently "Let him fuss and bustle now, my job's done and I'm lying downcapitally!"
 He could hear that Lavrushkathat sly, bold orderly of Denisov'swas talking, as w
ell as the quartermaster. Lavrushka was saying something about loaded wagons, bis
cuits, and oxen he had seen when he had gone out for provisions.  Then Denisov's 
voice was heard shouting farther and farther away. "Saddle! Second platoon!"  "Wh
ere are they off to now?" thought Rostov.  Five minutes later, Denisov came into 
the hut, climbed with muddy boots on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered h
is things about, took his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again. 
In answer to Rostov's inquiry where he was going, he answered vaguely and crossly
 that he had some business.  "Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!"
 said Denisov going out, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing t
hrough the mud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov had gone. Havin
g got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave the hut till toward ev
ening. Denisov had not yet returned. The weather had cleared up, and near the nex
t hut two officers and a cadet were playing svayka, laughing as they threw their 
missiles which buried themselves in the soft mud. Rostov joined them. In the midd
le of the game, the officers saw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on 
their skinny horses behind them. The wagons escorted by the hussars drew up to th
e picket ropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them.  "There now, Denisov has b
een worrying," said Rostov, "and here are the provisions."  "So they are!" said t
he officers. "Won't the soldiers be glad!"  A little behind the hussars came Deni
sov, accompanied by two infantry officers with whom he was talking.  Rostov went 
to meet them.  "I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a short thin man, evid
ently very angry, was saying.  "Haven't I told you I won't give them up?" replied
 Denisov.  "You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutinyseizing the transport of
 one's own army. Our men have had nothing to eat for two days."  "And mine have h
ad nothing for two weeks," said Denisov.  "It is robbery! You'll answer for it, s
ir!" said the infantry officer, raising his voice.  "Now, what are you pestewing 
me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losing his temper. "I shall answer for it and no
t you, and you'd better not buzz about here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!" he sh
outed at the officers.  "Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted 
and not riding away. "If you are determined to rob, I'll..."  "Go to the devil! q
uick ma'ch, while you're safe and sound!" and Denisov turned his horse on the off
icer.  "Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateningly, and turning h
is horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.  "A dog astwide a fence! A weal 
dog astwide a fence!" shouted Denisov after him the most insulting expression a c
avalryman can address to a mounted infantryman and riding up to Rostov, he burst 
out laughing.  "I've taken twansports from the infantwy by force!" he said. "Afte
r all, can't let our men starve."  The wagons that had reached the hussars had be
en consigned to an infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transp
ort was unescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force. The soldiers
 had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even shared them with the other 
squadrons.  The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov, and holding h
is fingers spread out before his eyes said  "This is how I look at this affair I 
know nothing about it and won't begin proceedings, but I advise you to ride over 
to the staff and settle the business there in the commissariat department and if 
possible sign a receipt for such and such stores received. If not, as the demand 
was booked against an infantry regiment, there will be a row and the affair may e
nd badly."  From the regimental commander's, Denisov rode straight to the staff w
ith a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening he came back to his du
gout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seen him in. Denisov could not speak
 and gasped for breath. When Rostov asked what was the matter, he only uttered so
me incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse, feeble voice.  Alarmed at Denisov's 
condition, Rostov suggested that he should undress, drink some water, and send fo
r the doctor.  "Twy me for wobbewy... oh! Some more water... Let them twy me, but
 I'll always thwash scoundwels... and I'll tell the Empewo'... Ice..." he muttere
d.  The regimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutely necessary to blee
d Denisov. A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy arm and only the
n was he able to relate what had happened to him.  "I get there," began Denisov. 
"'Now then, where's your chief's quarters?' They were pointed out. 'Please to wai
t.' 'I've widden twenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait. A
nnounce me.' Vewy well, so out comes their head chiefalso took it into his head t
o lecture me 'It's wobbewy!''Wobbewy,' I say, 'is not done by man who seizes pwov
isions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them to fill his own pockets!' 
'Will you please be silent?' 'Vewy good!' Then he says 'Go and give a weceipt to 
the commissioner, but your affair will be passed on to headquarters.' I go to the
 commissioner. I enter, and at the table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!
... Who is it that's starving us?" shouted Denisov, hitting the table with the fi
st of his newly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and the tu
mblers on it jumped about. "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who's starving us to dea
th! Is it? Take this and this!' and I hit him so pat, stwaight on his snout... 'A
h, what a... what a...!' and I sta'ted fwashing him... Well, I've had a bit of fu
n I can tell you!" cried Denisov, gleeful and yet angry, his white teeth showing 
under his black mustache. "I'd have killed him if they hadn't taken him away!"  "
But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself," said Rostov. "You've set your arm 
bleeding afresh. Wait, we must tie it up again."  Denisov was bandaged up again a
nd put to bed. Next day he woke calm and cheerful.  But at noon the adjutant of t
he regiment came into Rostov's and Denisov's dugout with a grave and serious face
 and regretfully showed them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regiment
al commander in which inquiries were made about yesterday's occurrence. The adjut
ant told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn that a courtmart
ial had been appointed, and that in view of the severity with which marauding and
 insubordination were now regarded, degradation to the ranks would be the best th
at could be hoped for.  The case, as represented by the offended parties, was tha
t, after seizing the transports, Major Denisov, being drunk, went to the chief qu
artermaster and without any provocation called him a thief, threatened to strike 
him, and on being led out had rushed into the office and given two officials a th
rashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.  In answer to Rostov's renewed qu
estions, Denisov said, laughing, that he thought he remembered that some other fe
llow had got mixed up in it, but that it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did
 not in the least fear any kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared atta
ck him he would give them an answer that they would not easily forget.  Denisov s
poke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostov knew him too well not to dete
ct that while hiding it from others at heart he feared a courtmartial and was wor
ried over the affair, which was evidently taking a bad turn. Every day, letters o
f inquiry and notices from the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denisov wa
s ordered to hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before th
e staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat office. On th
e previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack regiments and two squadrons 
of hussars. Denisov, as was his wont, rode out in front of the outposts, parading
 his courage. A bullet fired by a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part 
of his leg. Perhaps at another time Denisov would not have left the regiment for 
so slight a wound, but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appeari
ng at the staff and went into hospital.      CHAPTER XVII   In June the battle of
 Friedland was fought, in which the Pavlograds did not take part, and after that 
an armistice was proclaimed. Rostov, who felt his friend's absence very much, hav
ing no news of him since he left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the
 progress of his affairs, took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit D
enisov in hospital.  The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twic
e devastated by Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, when it is so b
eautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularly dismal appea
rance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets, tattered inhabitants, a
nd the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about.  The hospital was in a brick bu
ilding with some of the window frames and panes broken and a courtyard surrounded
 by the remains of a wooden fence that had been pulled to pieces. Several bandage
d soldiers, with pale swollen faces, were sitting or walking about in the sunshin
e in the yard.  Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of p
utrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian army doctor smoking 
a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.  "I can't tear myself to
 pieces," the doctor was saying. "Come to Makar Alexeevich in the evening. I shal
l be there."  The assistant asked some further questions.  "Oh, do the best you c
an! Isn't it all the same?" The doctor noticed Rostov coming upstairs.  "What do 
you want, sir?" said the doctor. "What do you want? The bullets having spared you
, do you want to try typhus? This is a pesthouse, sir."  "How so?" asked Rostov. 
 "Typhus, sir. It's death to go in. Only we two, Makeev and I" he pointed to the 
assistant, "keep on here. Some five of us doctors have died in this place.... Whe
n a new one comes he is done for in a week," said the doctor with evident satisfa
ction. "Prussian doctors have been invited here, but our allies don't like it at 
all."  Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars, who w
as wounded.  "I don't know. I can't tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone in char
ge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It's well that the ch
aritable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some lint each month or
 we should be lost!" he laughed. "Four hundred, sir, and they're always sending m
e fresh ones. There are four hundred? Eh?" he asked, turning to the assistant.  T
he assistant looked fagged out. He was evidently vexed and impatient for the talk
ative doctor to go.  "Major Denisov," Rostov said again. "He was wounded at Molli
ten."  "Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone of indifference
.  The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor's words.  "Is he tall and w
ith reddish hair?" asked the doctor.  Rostov described Denisov's appearance.  "Th
ere was one like that," said the doctor, as if pleased. "That one is dead, I fanc
y. However, I'll look up our list. We had a list. Have you got it, Makeev?"  "Mak
ar Alexeevich has the list," answered the assistant. "But if you'll step into the
 officers' wards you'll see for yourself," he added, turning to Rostov.  "Ah, you
'd better not go, sir," said the doctor, "or you may have to stay here yourself."
  But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to show h
im the way.  "Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted up after him.  Rostov and 
the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell was so strong there that Ros
tov held his nose and had to pause and collect his strength before he could go on
. A door opened to the right, and an emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot a
nd in underclothing, limped out and, leaning against the doorpost, looked with gl
ittering envious eyes at those who were passing. Glancing in at the door, Rostov 
saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats.  "M
ay I go in and look?"  "What is there to see?" said the assistant.  But, just bec
ause the assistant evidently did not want him to go in, Rostov entered the soldie
rs' ward. The foul air, to which he had already begun to get used in the corridor
, was still stronger here. It was a little different, more pungent, and one felt 
that this was where it originated.  In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun 
through the large windows, the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads 
to the walls, and leaving a passage in the middle. Most of them were unconscious 
and paid no attention to the newcomers. Those who were conscious raised themselve
s or lifted their thin yellow faces, and all looked intently at Rostov with the s
ame expression of hope, of relief, reproach, and envy of another's health. Rostov
 went to the middle of the room and looking through the open doors into the two a
djoining rooms saw the same thing there. He stood still, looking silently around.
 He had not at all expected such a sight. Just before him, almost across the midd
le of the passage on the bare floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to judge 
by the cut of his hair. The man lay on his back, his huge arms and legs outstretc
hed. His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so that only the whites were 
seen, and on his bare legs and arms which were still red, the veins stood out lik
e cords. He was knocking the back of his head against the floor, hoarsely utterin
g some word which he kept repeating. Rostov listened and made out the word. It wa
s "drink, drink, a drink!" Rostov glanced round, looking for someone who would pu
t this man back in his place and bring him water.  "Who looks after the sick here
?" he asked the assistant.  Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly,
 came in from the next room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostov.  "
Good day, your honor!" he shouted, rolling his eyes at Rostov and evidently mista
king him for one of the hospital authorities.  "Get him to his place and give him
 some water," said Rostov, pointing to the Cossack.  "Yes, your honor," the soldi
er replied complacently, and rolling his eyes more than ever he drew himself up s
till straighter, but did not move.  "No, it's impossible to do anything here," th
ought Rostov, lowering his eyes, and he was going out, but became aware of an int
ense look fixed on him on his right, and he turned. Close to the corner, on an ov
ercoat, sat an old, unshaven, graybearded soldier as thin as a skeleton, with a s
tern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov. The man's neighbor on one sid
e whispered something to him, pointing at Rostov, who noticed that the old man wa
nted to speak to him. He drew nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg be
nt under him, the other had been amputated above the knee. His neighbor on the ot
her side, who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back, wa
s a young soldier with a snub nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled and hi
s eyes were rolled back. Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran 
down his back.  "Why, this one seems..." he began, turning to the assistant.  "An
d how we've been begging, your honor," said the old soldier, his jaw quivering. "
He's been dead since morning. After all we're men, not dogs."  "I'll send someone
 at once. He shall be taken awaytaken away at once," said the assistant hurriedly
. "Let us go, your honor."  "Yes, yes, let us go," said Rostov hastily, and lower
ing his eyes and shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproa
chful envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the room.      CHAPT
ER XVIII   Going along the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to the officers' wa
rds, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. There were beds in
 these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or sitting on them. Som
e were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing gowns. The first person Rosto
v met in the officers' ward was a thin little man with one arm, who was walking a
bout the first room in a nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with a pipe between
 his teeth. Rostov looked at him, trying to remember where he had seen him before
.  "See where we've met again!" said the little man. "Tushin, Tushin, don't you r
emember, who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern? And I've had a bit cut off, you se
e..." he went on with a smile, pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown.
 "Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov? My neighbor," he added, when he heard who 
Rostov wanted. "Here, here," and Tushin led him into the next room, from whence c
ame sounds of several laughing voices.  "How can they laugh, or even live at all 
here?" thought Rostov, still aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had be
en so strong in the soldiers' ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those e
nvious looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face of that you
ng soldier with eyes rolled back.  Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head un
der the blanket, though it was nearly noon.  "Ah, Wostov? How are you, how are yo
u?" he called out, still in the same voice as in the regiment, but Rostov noticed
 sadly that under this habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden fee
ling showed itself in the expression of Denisov's face and the intonations of his
 voice.  His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six weeks a
fter he had been hit. His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces of the ot
her hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostov. What struck him wa
s that Denisov did not seem glad to see him, and smiled at him unnaturally. He di
d not ask about the regiment, nor about the general state of affairs, and when Ro
stov spoke of these matters did not listen.  Rostov even noticed that Denisov did
 not like to be reminded of the regiment, or in general of that other free life w
hich was going on outside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life 
and was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. On Rostov's
 inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once produced from under his pillow a 
paper he had received from the commission and the rough draft of his answer to it
. He became animated when he began reading his paper and specially drew Rostov's 
attention to the stinging rejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital compani
ons, who had gathered round Rostova fresh arrival from the world outsidegradually
 began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer. Rostov noticed by
 their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that story more than once
 and were tired of it. Only the man who had the next bed, a stout Uhlan, continue
d to sit on his bed, gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe, and little onearmed Tu
shin still listened, shaking his head disapprovingly. In the middle of the readin
g, the Uhlan interrupted Denisov.  "But what I say is," he said, turning to Rosto
v, "it would be best simply to petition the Emperor for pardon. They say great re
wards will now be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted...."  "Me pet
ition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which he tried hard to give 
the old energy and fire, but which sounded like an expression of irritable impote
nce. "What for? If I were a wobber I would ask mercy, but I'm being courtmartiale
d for bwinging wobbers to book. Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone. I've s
erved the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I to be degwa
ded?... Listen, I'm w'iting to them stwaight. This is what I say 'If I had wobbed
 the Tweasuwy...'"  "It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not t
he point, Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov. "One has to submit, and
 Vasili Dmitrich doesn't want to. You know the auditor told you it was a bad busi
ness."  "Well, let it be bad," said Denisov.  "The auditor wrote out a petition f
or you," continued Tushin, "and you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to ta
ke it. No doubt he" indicating Rostov "has connections on the staff. You won't fi
nd a better opportunity."  "Haven't I said I'm not going to gwovel?" Denisov inte
rrupted him, went on reading his paper.  Rostov had not the courage to persuade D
enisov, though he instinctively felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other
 officers was the safest, and though he would have been glad to be of service to 
Denisov. He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper.  When the re
ading of Denisov's virulent reply, which took more than an hour, was over, Rostov
 said nothing, and he spent the rest of the day in a most dejected state of mind 
amid Denisov's hospital comrades, who had gathered round him, telling them what h
e knew and listening to their stories. Denisov was moodily silent all the evening
.  Late in the evening, when Rostov was about to leave, he asked Denisov whether 
he had no commission for him.  "Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing round at
 the officers, and taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window,
 where he had an inkpot, and sat down to write.  "It seems it's no use knocking o
ne's head against a wall!" he said, coming from the window and giving Rostov a la
rge envelope. In it was the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor, in w
hich Denisov, without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials, sim
ply asked for pardon.  "Hand it in. It seems..."  He did not finish, but gave a p
ainfully unnatural smile.      CHAPTER XIX   Having returned to the regiment and 
told the commander the state of Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the
 letter to the Emperor.  On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperor
s arrived in Tilsit. Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom h
e was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at Tilsit
.  "I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon, whom hith
erto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.  "You are speaking of 
Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.  Boris looked at his general inquiringly
 and immediately saw that he was being tested.  "I am speaking, Prince, of the Em
peror Napoleon," he replied. The general patted him on the shoulder, with a smile
.  "You will go far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.  Boris was among 
the few present at the Niemen on the day the two Emperors met. He saw the raft, d
ecorated with monograms, saw Napoleon pass before the French Guards on the farthe
r bank of the river, saw the pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in s
ilence in a tavern on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon's arrival, saw bot
h Emperors get into boats, and saw how Napoleonreaching the raft firststepped qui
ckly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him, and how they both re
tired into the pavilion. Since he had begun to move in the highest circles Boris 
had made it his habit to watch attentively all that went on around him and to not
e it down. At the time of the meeting at Tilsit he asked the names of those who h
ad come with Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively 
to words spoken by important personages. At the moment the Emperors went into the
 pavilion he looked at his watch, and did not forget to look at it again when Ale
xander came out. The interview had lasted an hour and fiftythree minutes. He note
d this down that same evening, among other facts he felt to be of historic import
ance. As the Emperor's suite was a very small one, it was a matter of great impor
tance, for a man who valued his success in the service, to be at Tilsit on the oc
casion of this interview between the two Emperors, and having succeeded in this, 
Boris felt that henceforth his position was fully assured. He had not only become
 known, but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted him. Twice he had exe
cuted commissions to the Emperor himself, so that the latter knew his face, and a
ll those at court, far from coldshouldering him as at first when they considered 
him a newcomer, would now have been surprised had he been absent.  Boris lodged w
ith another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski. Zhilinski, a Pole brought up in
 Paris, was rich, and passionately fond of the French, and almost every day of th
e stay at Tilsit, French officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were 
dining and lunching with him and Boris.  On the evening of the twentyfourth of Ju
ne, Count Zhilinski arranged a supper for his French friends. The guest of honor 
was an aidedecamp of Napoleon's, there were also several French officers of the G
uard, and a page of Napoleon's, a young lad of an old aristocratic French family.
 That same day, Rostov, profiting by the darkness to avoid being recognized in ci
vilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the lodging occupied by Boris and Zhilin
ski.  Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far from havi
ng experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the Frenchwho from being
 foes had suddenly become friendsthat had taken place at headquarters and in Bori
s. In the army, Bonaparte and the French were still regarded with mingled feeling
s of anger, contempt, and fear. Only recently, talking with one of Platov's Cossa
ck officers, Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be t
reated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately, happening to meet a w
ounded French colonel on the road, Rostov had maintained with heat that peace was
 impossible between a legitimate sovereign and the criminal Bonaparte. Rostov was
 therefore unpleasantly struck by the presence of French officers in Boris' lodgi
ng, dressed in uniforms he had been accustomed to see from quite a different poin
t of view from the outposts of the flank. As soon as he noticed a French officer,
 who thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of hostility which he 
always experienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him. He stopped at t
he threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived there. Boris, hearing 
a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meet him. An expression of annoyance
 showed itself for a moment on his face on first recognizing Rostov.  "Ah, it's y
ou? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however, coming toward him with a 
smile. But Rostov had noticed his first impulse.  "I've come at a bad time I thin
k. I should not have come, but I have business," he said coldly.  "No, I only won
der how you managed to get away from your regiment. Dans un moment je suis a vous
," * he said, answering someone who called him.       * "In a minute I shall be a
t your disposal."   "I see I'm intruding," Rostov repeated.  The look of annoyanc
e had already disappeared from Boris' face having evidently reflected and decided
 how to act, he very quietly took both Rostov's hands and led him into the next r
oom. His eyes, looking serenely and steadily at Rostov, seemed to be veiled by so
mething, as if screened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So it seemed to Ro
stov.  "Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wrong time!" said Boris, and he l
ed him into the room where the supper table was laid and introduced him to his gu
ests, explaining that he was not a civilian, but an hussar officer, and an old fr
iend of his.  "Count Zhilinskile Comte N. N.le Capitaine S. S.," said he, naming 
his guests. Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowed reluctantly, and rem
ained silent.  Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new Russian person very w
illingly into his circle and did not speak to Rostov. Boris did not appear to not
ice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the same pleasant composure an
d the same veiled look in his eyes with which he had met Rostov, tried to enliven
 the conversation. One of the Frenchmen, with the politeness characteristic of hi
s countrymen, addressed the obstinately taciturn Rostov, saying that the latter h
ad probably come to Tilsit to see the Emperor.  "No, I came on business," replied
 Rostov, briefly.  Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the lo
ok of dissatisfaction on Boris' face, and as always happens to those in a bad hum
or, it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversion and that he was in 
everybody's way. He really was in their way, for he alone took no part in the con
versation which again became general. The looks the visitors cast on him seemed t
o say "And what is he sitting here for?" He rose and went up to Boris.  "Anyhow, 
I'm in your way," he said in a low tone. "Come and talk over my business and I'll
 go away."  "Oh, no, not at all," said Boris. "But if you are tired, come and lie
 down in my room and have a rest."  "Yes, really..."  They went into the little r
oom where Boris slept. Rostov, without sitting down, began at once, irritably as 
if Boris were to blame in some way telling him about Denisov's affair, asking him
 whether, through his general, he could and would intercede with the Emperor on D
enisov's behalf and get Denisov's petition handed in. When he and Boris were alon
e, Rostov felt for the first time that he could not look Boris in the face withou
t a sense of awkwardness. Boris, with one leg crossed over the other and stroking
 his left hand with the slender fingers of his right, listened to Rostov as a gen
eral listens to the report of a subordinate, now looking aside and now gazing str
aight into Rostov's eyes with the same veiled look. Each time this happened Rosto
v felt uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.  "I have heard of such cases and kno
w that His Majesty is very severe in such affairs. I think it would be best not t
o bring it before the Emperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... But
 in general, I think..."  "So you don't want to do anything? Well then, say so!" 
Rostov almost shouted, not looking Boris in the face.  Boris smiled.  "On the con
trary, I will do what I can. Only I thought..."  At that moment Zhilinski's voice
 was heard calling Boris.  "Well then, go, go, go..." said Rostov, and refusing s
upper and remaining alone in the little room, he walked up and down for a long ti
me, hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room.      CHAPTER
 XX   Rostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition on Denisov'
s behalf. He could not himself go to the general in attendance as he was in mufti
 and had come to Tilsit without permission to do so, and Boris, even had he wishe
d to, could not have done so on the following day. On that day, June 27, the prel
iminaries of peace were signed. The Emperors exchanged decorations Alexander rece
ived the Cross of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the
 First Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening, given by a battali
on of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk battalion. The Emperors were to be p
resent at that banquet.  Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris 
that, when the latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and earl
y next morning went away, avoiding Boris. In his civilian clothes and a round hat
, he wandered about the town, staring at the French and their uniforms and at the
 streets and houses where the Russian and French Emperors were staying. In a squa
re he saw tables being set up and preparations made for the dinner he saw the Rus
sian and French colors draped from side to side of the streets, with huge monogra
ms A and N. In the windows of the houses also flags and bunting were displayed.  
"Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't want to ask him. That's settled," thou
ght Nicholas. "All is over between us, but I won't leave here without having done
 all I can for Denisov and certainly not without getting his letter to the Empero
r. The Emperor!... He is here!" thought Rostov, who had unconsciously returned to
 the house where Alexander lodged.  Saddled horses were standing before the house
 and the suite were assembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out. 
 "I may see him at any moment," thought Rostov. "If only I were to hand the lette
r direct to him and tell him all... could they really arrest me for my civilian c
lothes? Surely not! He would understand on whose side justice lies. He understand
s everything, knows everything. Who can be more just, more magnanimous than he? A
nd even if they did arrest me for being here, what would it matter?" thought he, 
looking at an officer who was entering the house the Emperor occupied. "After all
, people do go in.... It's all nonsense! I'll go in and hand the letter to the Em
peror myself so much the worse for Drubetskoy who drives me to it!" And suddenly 
with a determination he himself did not expect, Rostov felt for the letter in his
 pocket and went straight to the house.  "No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as
 I did after Austerlitz," he thought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch,
 and conscious of the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. "I will fall
 at his feet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will even than
k me. 'I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustice is the greatest hap
piness,'" Rostov fancied the sovereign saying. And passing people who looked afte
r him with curiosity, he entered the porch of the Emperor's house.  A broad stair
case led straight up from the entry, and to the right he saw a closed door. Below
, under the staircase, was a door leading to the lower floor.  "Whom do you want?
" someone inquired.  "To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nich
olas, with a tremor in his voice.  "A petition? This way, to the officer on duty"
 he was shown the door leading downstairs, "only it won't be accepted."  On heari
ng this indifferent voice, Rostov grew frightened at what he was doing the though
t of meeting the Emperor at any moment was so fascinating and consequently so ala
rming that he was ready to run away, but the official who had questioned him open
ed the door, and Rostov entered.  A short stout man of about thirty, in white bre
eches and high boots and a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, 
standing in that room, and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches
 a new pair of handsome silkembroidered braces that, for some reason, attracted R
ostov's attention. This man was speaking to someone in the adjoining room.  "A go
od figure and in her first bloom," he was saying, but on seeing Rostov, he stoppe
d short and frowned.  "What is it? A petition?"  "What is it?" asked the person i
n the other room.  "Another petitioner," answered the man with the braces.  "Tell
 him to come later. He'll be coming out directly, we must go."  "Later... later! 
Tomorrow. It's too late..."  Rostov turned and was about to go, but the man in th
e braces stopped him.  "Whom have you come from? Who are you?"  "I come from Majo
r Denisov," answered Rostov.  "Are you an officer?"  "Lieutenant Count Rostov."  
"What audacity! Hand it in through your commander. And go along with you... go," 
and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him.  Rostov went back in
to the hall and noticed that in the porch there were many officers and generals i
n full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.  Cursing his temerity, his heart sink
ing at the thought of finding himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor
 and being put to shame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the impr
opriety of his conduct and repenting of it, Rostov, with downcast eyes, was makin
g his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a familiar voice call
ed him and a hand detained him.  "What are you doing here, sir, in civilian dress
?" asked a deep voice.  It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor's s
pecial favor during this campaign, and who had formerly commanded the division in
 which Rostov was serving.  Rostov, in dismay, began justifying himself, but seei
ng the kindly, jocular face of the general, he took him aside and in an excited v
oice told him the whole affair, asking him to intercede for Denisov, whom the gen
eral knew. Having heard Rostov to the end, the general shook his head gravely.  "
I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give me the letter."  Hardly had Rostov ha
nded him the letter and finished explaining Denisov's case, when hasty steps and 
the jingling of spurs were heard on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, wen
t to the porch. The gentlemen of the Emperor's suite ran down the stairs and went
 to their horses. Hayne, the same groom who had been at Austerlitz, led up the Em
peror's horse, and the faint creak of a footstep Rostov knew at once was heard on
 the stairs. Forgetting the danger of being recognized, Rostov went close to the 
porch, together with some inquisitive civilians, and again, after two years, saw 
those features he adored that same face and same look and step, and the same unio
n of majesty and mildness.... And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sove
reign rose again in Rostov's soul in all its old force. In the uniform of the Pre
obrazhensk regimentwhite chamoisleather breeches and high bootsand wearing a star
 Rostov did not know it was that of the Legion d'honneur, the monarch came out in
to the porch, putting on his gloves and carrying his hat under his arm. He stoppe
d and looked about him, brightening everything around by his glance. He spoke a f
ew words to some of the generals, and, recognizing the former commander of Rostov
's division, smiled and beckoned to him.  All the suite drew back and Rostov saw 
the general talking for some time to the Emperor.  The Emperor said a few words t
o him and took a step toward his horse. Again the crowd of members of the suite a
nd street gazers among whom was Rostov moved nearer to the Emperor. Stopping besi
de his horse, with his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the cavalry gene
ral and said in a loud voice, evidently wishing to be heard by all  "I cannot do 
it, General. I cannot, because the law is stronger than I," and he raised his foo
t to the stirrup.  The general bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mount
ed and rode down the street at a gallop. Beside himself with enthusiasm, Rostov r
an after him with the crowd.      CHAPTER XXI   The Emperor rode to the square wh
ere, facing one another, a battalion of the Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the r
ight and a battalion of the French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left.  As
 the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which presented arms, another g
roup of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, and at the head of them Rosto
v recognized Napoleon. It could be no one else. He came at a gallop, wearing a sm
all hat, a blue uniform open over a white vest, and the St. Andrew ribbon over hi
s shoulder. He was riding a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson
 goldembroidered saddlecloth. On approaching Alexander he raised his hat, and as 
he did so, Rostov, with his cavalryman's eye, could not help noticing that Napole
on did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalions shouted "Hurrah!" and
 "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said something to Alexander, and both Emperors dismo
unted and took each other's hands. Napoleon's face wore an unpleasant and artific
ial smile. Alexander was saying something affable to him.  In spite of the trampl
ing of the French gendarmes' horses, which were pushing back the crowd, Rostov ke
pt his eyes on every movement of Alexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surp
rise that Alexander treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite a
t ease with the Tsar, as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matte
r to him.  Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approache
d the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straight up to the crow
d standing there. The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close to the Emperors th
at Rostov, standing in the front row, was afraid he might be recognized.  "Sire, 
I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to the bravest of your soldi
ers," said a sharp, precise voice, articulating every letter.  This was said by t
he undersized Napoleon, looking up straight into Alexander's eyes. Alexander list
ened attentively to what was said to him and, bending his head, smiled pleasantly
.  "To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war," added Napoleon, 
accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and assurance exasperating to Ros
tov, he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn up before him, who all presente
d arms with their eyes fixed on their Emperor.  "Will Your Majesty allow me to co
nsult the colonel?" said Alexander and took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlo
vski, the commander of the battalion.  Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove
 off his small white hand, tore it in doing so, and threw it away. An aidedecamp 
behind him rushed forward and picked it up.  "To whom shall it be given?" the Emp
eror Alexander asked Koslovski, in Russian in a low voice.  "To whomever Your Maj
esty commands."  The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, glancing ba
ck, remarked  "But we must give him an answer."  Kozlovski scanned the ranks reso
lutely and included Rostov in his scrutiny.  "Can it be me?" thought Rostov.  "La
zarev!" the colonel called, with a frown, and Lazarev, the first soldier in the r
ank, stepped briskly forward.  "Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispere
d to Lazarev who did not know where to go. Lazarev stopped, casting a sidelong lo
ok at his colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens to soldiers calle
d before the ranks.  Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little 
hand out behind him as if to take something. The members of his suite, guessing a
t once what he wanted, moved about and whispered as they passed something from on
e to another, and a pagethe same one Rostov had seen the previous evening at Bori
s'ran forward and, bowing respectfully over the outstretched hand and not keeping
 it waiting a moment, laid in it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without look
ing, pressed two fingers together and the badge was between them. Then he approac
hed Lazarev who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his own monarch, looked
 round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was now doing was done for 
the sake of his ally, and the small white hand holding the Order touched one of L
azarev's buttons. It was as if Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his h
and to deign to touch that soldier's breast for the soldier to be forever happy, 
rewarded, and distinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid
 the cross on Lazarev's breast and, dropping his hand, turned toward Alexander as
 though sure that the cross would adhere there. And it really did.  Officious han
ds, Russian and French, immediately seized the cross and fastened it to the unifo
rm. Lazarev glanced morosely at the little man with white hands who was doing som
ething to him and, still standing motionless presenting arms, looked again straig
ht into Alexander's eyes, as if asking whether he should stand there, or go away,
 or do something else. But receiving no orders, he remained for some time in that
 rigid position.  The Emperors remounted and rode away. The Preobrazhensk battali
on, breaking rank, mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables prep
ared for them.  Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officers em
braced him, congratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of officers and civi
lians drew near merely to see him. A rumble of Russian and French voices and laug
hter filled the air round the tables in the square. Two officers with flushed fac
es, looking cheerful and happy, passed by Rostov.  "What d'you think of the treat
? All on silver plate," one of them was saying. "Have you seen Lazarev?"  "I have
."  "Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner."  "Yes, but w
hat luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pension for life."  "Here's a cap, l
ads!" shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier, donning a shaggy French cap.  "It's a fine
 thing! Firstrate!"  "Have you heard the password?" asked one Guards' officer of 
another. "The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure' yesterday,
 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.' One day our Emperor gives it and next day Napoleo
n. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George's Cross to the bravest of the Fren
ch Guards. It has to be done. He must respond in kind."  Boris, too, with his fri
end Zhilinski, came to see the Preobrazhensk banquet. On his way back, he noticed
 Rostov standing by the corner of a house.  "Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one 
another," he said, and could not refrain from asking what was the matter, so stra
ngely dismal and troubled was Rostov's face.  "Nothing, nothing," replied Rostov.
  "You'll call round?"  "Yes, I will."  Rostov stood at that corner for a long ti
me, watching the feast from a distance. In his mind, a painful process was going 
on which he could not bring to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose in his soul. No
w he remembered Denisov with his changed expression, his submission, and the whol
e hospital, with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease. So vividly did 
he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he looked round to see where th
e smell came from. Next he thought of that selfsatisfied Bonaparte, with his smal
l white hand, who was now an Emperor, liked and respected by Alexander. Then why 
those severed arms and legs and those dead men?... Then again he thought of Lazar
ev rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned. He caught himself harboring such
 strange thoughts that he was frightened.  The smell of the food the Preobrazhens
kis were eating and a sense of hunger recalled him from these reflections he had 
to get something to eat before going away. He went to a hotel he had noticed that
 morning. There he found so many people, among them officers who, like himself, h
ad come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in getting a dinner. Two offi
cers of his own division joined him. The conversation naturally turned on the pea
ce. The officers, his comrades, like most of the army, were dissatisfied with the
 peace concluded after the battle of Friedland. They said that had we held out a 
little longer Napoleon would have been done for, as his troops had neither provis
ions nor ammunition. Nicholas ate and drank chiefly the latter in silence. He fin
ished a couple of bottles of wine by himself. The process in his mind went on tor
menting him without reaching a conclusion. He feared to give way to his thoughts,
 yet could not get rid of them. Suddenly, on one of the officers' saying that it 
was humiliating to look at the French, Rostov began shouting with uncalledfor wra
th, and therefore much to the surprise of the officers  "How can you judge what's
 best?" he cried, the blood suddenly rushing to his face. "How can you judge the 
Emperor's actions? What right have we to argue? We cannot comprehend either the E
mperor's aims or his actions!"  "But I never said a word about the Emperor!" said
 the officer, justifying himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, exc
ept on the supposition that he was drunk.  But Rostov did not listen to him.  "We
 are not diplomatic officials, we are soldiers and nothing more," he went on. "If
 we are ordered to die, we must die. If we're punished, it means that we have des
erved it, it's not for us to judge. If the Emperor pleases to recognize Bonaparte
 as Emperor and to conclude an alliance with him, it means that that is the right
 thing to do. If once we begin judging and arguing about everything, nothing sacr
ed will be left! That way we shall be saying there is no Godnothing!" shouted Nic
holas, banging the tablevery little to the point as it seemed to his listeners, b
ut quite relevantly to the course of his own thoughts.  "Our business is to do ou
r duty, to fight and not to think! That's all...." said he.  "And to drink," said
 one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel.  "Yes, and to drink," assented Nich
olas. "Hullo there! Another bottle!" he shouted.  In 1808 the Emperor Alexander w
ent to Erfurt for a fresh interview with the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper c
ircles of Petersburg there was much talk of the grandeur of this important meetin
g.      CHAPTER XXII   In 1809 the intimacy between "the world's two arbiters," a
s Napoleon and Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared war on
 Austria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to cooperate with our old enemy Bon
aparte against our old ally the Emperor of Austria, and in court circles the poss
ibility of marriage between Napoleon and one of Alexander's sisters was spoken of
. But besides considerations of foreign policy, the attention of Russian society 
was at that time keenly directed on the internal changes that were being undertak
en in all the departments of government.  Life meanwhilereal life, with its essen
tial interests of health and sickness, toil and rest, and its intellectual intere
sts in thought, science, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, and passionswen
t on as usual, independently of and apart from political friendship or enmity wit
h Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction.      BOOK SIX 18
08  10      CHAPTER I   Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the cou
ntry.  All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estatesand constantly changing f
rom one thing to another had never accomplishedwere carried out by Prince Andrew 
without display and without perceptible difficulty.  He had in the highest degree
 a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked, and without fuss or strain on his part
 this set things going.  On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liber
ated and became free agricultural laborersthis being one of the first examples of
 the kind in Russia. On other estates the serfs' compulsory labor was commuted fo
r a quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged for Bogucharovo at his expense, and a
 priest was paid to teach reading and writing to the children of the peasants and
 household serfs.  Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his fathe
r and his son, who was still in the care of nurses. The other half he spent in "B
ogucharovo Cloister," as his father called Prince Andrew's estate. Despite the in
difference to the affairs of the world he had expressed to Pierre, he diligently 
followed all that went on, received many books, and to his surprise noticed that 
when he or his father had visitors from Petersburg, the very vortex of life, thes
e people lagged behind himselfwho never left the countryin knowledge of what was 
happening in home and foreign affairs.  Besides being occupied with his estates a
nd reading a great variety of books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a c
ritical survey of our last two unfortunate campaigns, and with drawing up a propo
sal for a reform of the army rules and regulations.  In the spring of 1809 he wen
t to visit the Ryazan estates which had been inherited by his son, whose guardian
 he was.  Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in the caleche looking at the new 
grass, the first leaves on the birches, and the first puffs of white spring cloud
s floating across the clear blue sky. He was not thinking of anything, but looked
 absentmindedly and cheerfully from side to side.  They crossed the ferry where h
e had talked with Pierre the year before. They went through the muddy village, pa
st threshing floors and green fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lod
ged near the bridge, uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past s
trips of stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there, and into a bi
rch forest growing on both sides of the road. In the forest it was almost hot, no
 wind could be felt. The birches with their sticky green leaves were motionless, 
and lilaccolored flowers and the first blades of green grass were pushing up and 
lifting last year's leaves. The coarse evergreen color of the small fir trees sca
ttered here and there among the birches was an unpleasant reminder of winter. On 
entering the forest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly.  Peter the foo
tman made some remark to the coachman the latter assented. But apparently the coa
chman's sympathy was not enough for Peter, and he turned on the box toward his ma
ster.  "How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said with a respectful smile.  "
What?"  "It's pleasant, your excellency!"  "What is he talking about?" thought Pr
ince Andrew. "Oh, the spring, I suppose," he thought as he turned round. "Yes, re
ally everything is green already.... How early! The birches and cherry and alders
 too are coming out.... But the oaks show no sign yet. Ah, here is one oak!"   At
 the edge of the road stood an oak. Probably ten times the age of the birches tha
t formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice as tall as they. It was 
an enormous tree, its girth twice as great as a man could embrace, and evidently 
long ago some of its branches had been broken off and its bark scarred. With its 
huge ungainly limbs sprawling unsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands and fingers,
 it stood an aged, stern, and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees. Onl
y the deadlooking evergreen firs dotted about in the forest, and this oak, refuse
d to yield to the charm of spring or notice either the spring or the sunshine.  "
Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say. "Are you not weary of that stup
id, meaningless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the same and always a fraud? T
here is no spring, no sun, no happiness! Look at those cramped dead firs, ever th
e same, and at me too, sticking out my broken and barked fingers just where they 
have grown, whether from my back or my sides as they have grown so I stand, and I
 do not believe in your hopes and your lies."  As he passed through the forest Pr
ince Andrew turned several times to look at that oak, as if expecting something f
rom it. Under the oak, too, were flowers and grass, but it stood among them scowl
ing, rigid, misshapen, and grim as ever.  "Yes, the oak is right, a thousand time
s right," thought Prince Andrew. "Let othersthe youngyield afresh to that fraud, 
but we know life, our life is finished!"  A whole sequence of new thoughts, hopel
ess but mournfully pleasant, rose in his soul in connection with that tree. Durin
g this journey he, as it were, considered his life afresh and arrived at his old 
conclusion, restful in its hopelessness that it was not for him to begin anything
 anewbut that he must live out his life, content to do no harm, and not disturbin
g himself or desiring anything.      CHAPTER II   Prince Andrew had to see the Ma
rshal of the Nobility for the district in connection with the affairs of the Ryaz
an estate of which he was trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in the
 middle of May Prince Andrew went to visit him.  It was now hot spring weather. T
he whole forest was already clothed in green. It was dusty and so hot that on pas
sing near water one longed to bathe.  Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied wi
th the business about which he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the av
enue in the grounds of the Rostovs' house at Otradnoe. He heard merry girlish cri
es behind some trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross the p
ath of his caleche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a darkhaired, remarka
bly slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress, with a white handkerchief on her 
head from under which loose locks of hair escaped. The girl was shouting somethin
g but, seeing that he was a stranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.  
Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was so beautiful, the sun 
so bright, everything around so gay, but that slim pretty girl did not know, or w
ish to know, of his existence and was contented and cheerful in her own separatep
robably foolishbut bright and happy life. "What is she so glad about? What is she
 thinking of? Not of the military regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryazan
 serfs' quitrents. Of what is she thinking? Why is she so happy?" Prince Andrew a
sked himself with instinctive curiosity.  In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at
 Otradnoe just as he had done in former years, that is, entertaining almost the w
hole province with hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was glad to see Pri
nce Andrew, as he was to see any new visitor, and insisted on his staying the nig
ht.  During the dull day, in the course of which he was entertained by his elderl
y hosts and by the more important of the visitors the old count's house was crowd
ed on account of an approaching name day, Prince Andrew repeatedly glanced at Nat
asha, gay and laughing among the younger members of the company, and asked himsel
f each time, "What is she thinking about? Why is she so glad?"  That night, alone
 in new surroundings, he was long unable to sleep. He read awhile and then put ou
t his candle, but relit it. It was hot in the room, the inside shutters of which 
were closed. He was cross with the stupid old man as he called Rostov, who had ma
de him stay by assuring him that some necessary documents had not yet arrived fro
m town, and he was vexed with himself for having stayed.  He got up and went to t
he window to open it. As soon as he opened the shutters the moonlight, as if it h
ad long been watching for this, burst into the room. He opened the casement. The 
night was fresh, bright, and very still. Just before the window was a row of poll
ard trees, looking black on one side and with a silvery light on the other. Benea
th the trees grewsome kind of lush, wet, bushy vegetation with silverlit leaves a
nd stems here and there. Farther back beyond the dark trees a roof glittered with
 dew, to the right was a leafy tree with brilliantly white trunk and branches, an
d above it shone the moon, nearly at its full, in a pale, almost starless, spring
 sky. Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on 
that sky.  His room was on the first floor. Those in the rooms above were also aw
ake. He heard female voices overhead.  "Just once more," said a girlish voice abo
ve him which Prince Andrew recognized at once.  "But when are you coming to bed?"
 replied another voice.  "I won't, I can't sleep, what's the use? Come now for th
e last time."   Two girlish voices sang a musical passagethe end of some song.  "
Oh, how lovely! Now go to sleep, and there's an end of it."  "You go to sleep, bu
t I can't," said the first voice, coming nearer to the window. She was evidently 
leaning right out, for the rustle of her dress and even her breathing could be he
ard. Everything was stonestill, like the moon and its light and the shadows. Prin
ce Andrew, too, dared not stir, for fear of betraying his unintentional presence.
  "Sonya! Sonya!" he again heard the first speaker. "Oh, how can you sleep? Only 
look how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake up, Sonya!" she said almost wi
th tears in her voice. "There never, never was such a lovely night before!"  Sony
a made some reluctant reply.  "Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovel
y! Come here.... Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like sitt
ing down on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this, straining tight, 
as tight as possible, and flying away! Like this...."  "Take care, you'll fall ou
t."  He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapproving voice "It's past on
e o'clock."  "Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, go, go!"  Again all wa
s silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sitting there. From time to time h
e heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh.  "O God, O God! What does it mean?" sh
e suddenly exclaimed. "To bed then, if it must be!" and she slammed the casement.
  "For her I might as well not exist!" thought Prince Andrew while he listened to
 her voice, for some reason expecting yet fearing that she might say something ab
out him. "There she is again! As if it were on purpose," thought he.  In his soul
 there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of youthful thoughts and hopes, 
contrary to the whole tenor of his life, that unable to explain his condition to 
himself he lay down and fell asleep at once.      CHAPTER III   Next morning, hav
ing taken leave of no one but the count, and not waiting for the ladies to appear
, Prince Andrew set off for home.  It was already the beginning of June when on h
is return journey he drove into the birch forest where the gnarled old oak had ma
de so strange and memorable an impression on him. In the forest the harness bells
 sounded yet more muffled than they had done six weeks before, for now all was th
ick, shady, and dense, and the young firs dotted about in the forest did not jar 
on the general beauty but, lending themselves to the mood around, were delicately
 green with fluffy young shoots.  The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm w
as gathering, but only a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprink
ling the road and the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark in the s
hade, the right side glittered in the sunlight, wet and shiny and scarcely swayed
 by the breeze. Everything was in blossom, the nightingales trilled, and their vo
ices reverberated now near, now far away.  "Yes, here in this forest was that oak
 with which I agreed," thought Prince Andrew. "But where is it?" he again wondere
d, gazing at the left side of the road, and without recognizing it he looked with
 admiration at the very oak he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured, spreading
 out a canopy of sappy darkgreen foliage, stood rapt and slightly trembling in th
e rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarled fingers nor old scars nor old doubts a
nd sorrows were any of them in evidence now. Through the hard centuryold bark, ev
en where there were no twigs, leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believ
e the old veteran could have produced.  "Yes, it is the same oak," thought Prince
 Andrew, and all at once he was seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of jo
y and renewal. All the best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory. Aust
erlitz with the lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face, Pierre at the fe
rry, that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night, and that night itself and the
 moon, and.... all this rushed suddenly to his mind.  "No, life is not over at th
irtyone!" Prince Andrew suddenly decided finally and decisively. "It is not enoug
h for me to know what I have in meeveryone must know it Pierre, and that young gi
rl who wanted to fly away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life ma
y not be lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it, but so that i
t may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!"   On reachin
g home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn and found all sorts 
of reasons for this decision. A whole series of sensible and logical consideratio
ns showing it to be essential for him to go to Petersburg, and even to reenter th
e service, kept springing up in his mind. He could not now understand how he coul
d ever even have doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as
 a month before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country c
ould ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him that all his experience of l
ife must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to some kind of work and agai
n played an active part in life. He did not even remember how formerly, on the st
rength of similar wretched logical arguments, it had seemed obvious that he would
 be degrading himself if he now, after the lessons he had had in life, allowed hi
mself to believe in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of hap
piness or love. Now reason suggested quite the opposite. After that journey to Ry
azan he found the country dull his former pursuits no longer interested him, and 
often when sitting alone in his study he got up, went to the mirror, and gazed a 
long time at his own face. Then he would turn away to the portrait of his dead Li
se, who with hair curled a la grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the
 gilt frame. She did not now say those former terrible words to him, but looked s
imply, merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing his arms be
hind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling, as he reflected on thos
e irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as a crime, which altered his whole 
life and were connected with Pierre, with fame, with the girl at the window, the 
oak, and woman's beauty and love. And if anyone came into his room at such moment
s he was particularly cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.  "My dear,
" Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say, "little Nicholas can't go ou
t today, it's very cold."  "If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply at such ti
mes very dryly to his sister, "he could go out in his smock, but as it is cold he
 must wear warm clothes, which were designed for that purpose. That is what follo
ws from the fact that it is cold and not that a child who needs fresh air should 
remain at home," he would add with extreme logic, as if punishing someone for tho
se secret illogical emotions that stirred within him.  At such moments Princess M
ary would think how intellectual work dries men up.      CHAPTER IV   Prince Andr
ew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809. It was the time when the youthful Spera
nski was at the zenith of his fame and his reforms were being pushed forward with
 the greatest energy. That same August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, i
njured his leg, and remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski every d
ay and no one else. At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared that 
so agitated societyabolishing court ranks and introducing examinations to qualify
 for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State Councilorand not merely these bu
t a whole state constitution, intended to change the existing order of government
 in Russia legal, administrative, and financial, from the Council of State down t
o the district tribunals. Now those vague liberal dreams with which the Emperor A
lexander had ascended the throne, and which he had tried to put into effect with 
the aid of his associates, Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Kochubey, and Strogonovwhom 
he himself in jest had called his Comite de salut publicwere taking shape and bei
ng realized.  Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side, and
 Arakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as a gentleman 
of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee. The Emperor, though he
 met him twice, did not favor him with a single word. It had always seemed to Pri
nce Andrew before that he was antipathetic to the Emperor and that the latter dis
liked his face and personality generally, and in the cold, repellent glance the E
mperor gave him, he now found further confirmation of this surmise. The courtiers
 explained the Emperor's neglect of him by His Majesty's displeasure at Bolkonski
's not having served since 1805.  "I know myself that one cannot help one's sympa
thies and antipathies," thought Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to present my p
roposal for the reform of the army regulations to the Emperor personally, but the
 project will speak for itself."  He mentioned what he had written to an old fiel
d marshal, a friend of his father's. The field marshal made an appointment to see
 him, received him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few days lat
er Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister of War, Co
unt Arakcheev.   On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's wai
ting room at nine in the morning.  He did not know Arakcheev personally, had neve
r seen him, and all he had heard of him inspired him with but little respect for 
the man.  "He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need not co
ncern myself about his personal qualities he has been commissioned to consider my
 project, so he alone can get it adopted," thought Prince Andrew as he waited amo
ng a number of important and unimportant people in Count Arakcheev's waiting room
.  During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen the anteroo
ms of many important men, and the different types of such rooms were well known t
o him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a special character. The faces of the
 unimportant people awaiting their turn for an audience showed embarrassment and 
servility the faces of those of higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkward
ness, covered by a mask of unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation,
 and the person for whom they were waiting. Some walked thoughtfully up and down,
 others whispered and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila Andreevich"
 and the words, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in reference to Count Arakcheev. 
One general an important personage, evidently feeling offended at having to wait 
so long, sat crossing and uncrossing his legs and smiling contemptuously to himse
lf.  But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all facesthat o
f fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the adjutant on duty to take in h
is name, but received an ironical look and was told that his turn would come in d
ue course. After some others had been shown in and out of the minister's room by 
the adjutant on duty, an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and f
rightened air was admitted at that terrible door. This officer's audience lasted 
a long time. Then suddenly the grating sound of a harsh voice was heard from the 
other side of the door, and the officerwith pale face and trembling lipscame out 
and passed through the waiting room, clutching his head.  After this Prince Andre
w was conducted to the door and the officer on duty said in a whisper, "To the ri
ght, at the window."  Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the tabl
e a man of forty with a long waist, a long closely cropped head, deep wrinkles, s
cowling brows above dull greenishhazel eyes and an overhanging red nose. Arakchee
v turned his head toward him without looking at him.  "What is your petition?" as
ked Arakcheev.  "I am not petitioning, your excellency," returned Prince Andrew q
uietly.  Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him.  "Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkon
ski?"  "I am not petitioning about anything. His Majesty the Emperor has deigned 
to send your excellency a project submitted by me..."  "You see, my dear sir, I h
ave read your project," interrupted Arakcheev, uttering only the first words amia
bly and thenagain without looking at Prince Andrewrelapsing gradually into a tone
 of grumbling contempt. "You are proposing new military laws? There are many laws
 but no one to carry out the old ones. Nowadays everybody designs laws, it is eas
ier writing than doing."  "I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish to learn from
 your excellency how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented," s
aid Prince Andrew politely.  "I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and
 sent it to the committee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, rising and ta
king a paper from his writing table. "Here!" and he handed it to Prince Andrew.  
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters, misspelled, and
 without punctuation "Unsoundly constructed because resembles an imitation of the
 French military code and from the Articles of War needlessly deviating."  "To wh
at committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquired Prince Andrew.  "To the 
Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that your honor should be a
ppointed a member, but without a salary."  Prince Andrew smiled.  "I don't want o
ne."  "A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev. "I have the honor... Eh! Cal
l the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing to Prince Andrew.      CHA
PTER V   While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee P
rince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those he knew to be
 in power and whose aid he might need. In Petersburg he now experienced the same 
feeling he had had on the eve of a battle, when troubled by anxious curiosity and
 irresistibly attracted to the ruling circles where the future, on which the fate
 of millions depended, was being shaped. From the irritation of the older men, th
e curiosity of the uninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoc
cupation of everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose exi
stence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in Petersburg a vast
 civil conflict was in preparation, the commander in chief of which was a mysteri
ous person he did not know, but who was supposed to be a man of geniusSperanski. 
And this movement of reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and 
Speranski its chief promoter, began to interest him so keenly that the question o
f the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his consciousness.
  Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the highest
 and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The reforming party cordially we
lcomed and courted him, in the first place because he was reputed to be clever an
d very well read, and secondly because by liberating his serfs he had obtained th
e reputation of being a liberal. The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censu
red the innovations, turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of
 the reforms, simply because he was the son of his father. The feminine society w
orld welcomed him gladly, because he was rich, distinguished, a good match, and a
lmost a newcomer, with a halo of romance on account of his supposed death and the
 tragic loss of his wife. Besides this the general opinion of all who had known h
im previously was that he had greatly improved during these last five years, havi
ng softened and grown more manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemp
tuous irony, and acquired the serenity that comes with years. People talked about
 him, were interested in him, and wanted to meet him.  The day after his intervie
w with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew spent the evening at Count Kochubey's. He t
old the count of his interview with Sila Andreevich Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev b
y that nickname with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minist
er of War's anteroom.  "Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael 
Mikhaylovich Speranski. He manages everything. I'll speak to him. He has promised
 to come this evening."  "What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" as
ked Prince Andrew.  Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkons
ki's simplicity.  "We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubey con
tinued, "and about your freed plowmen."  "Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed y
our serfs?" said an old man of Catherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bol
konski.  "It was a small estate that brought in no profit," replied Prince Andrew
, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old man uselessly.  "A
fraid of being late..." said the old man, looking at Kochubey.  "There's one thin
g I don't understand," he continued. "Who will plow the land if they are set free
? It is easy to write laws, but difficult to rule.... Just the same as nowI ask y
ou, Countwho will be heads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinat
ions?"  "Those who pass the examinations, I suppose," replied Kochubey, crossing 
his legs and glancing round.  "Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a spl
endid man, a priceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to go up for examination?"  "Ye
s, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general, but..."  Count Kochub
ey did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm, and went to meet a tal
l, bald, fair man of about forty with a large open forehead and a long face of un
usual and peculiar whiteness, who was just entering. The newcomer wore a blue swa
llowtail coat with a cross suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast.
 It was Speranski. Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb within 
him, as happens at critical moments of life. Whether it was from respect, envy, o
r anticipation, he did not know. Speranski's whole figure was of a peculiar type 
that made him easily recognizable. In the society in which Prince Andrew lived he
 had never seen anyone who together with awkward and clumsy gestures possessed su
ch calmness and selfassurance he had never seen so resolute yet gentle an express
ion as that in those halfclosed, rather humid eyes, or so firm a smile that expre
ssed nothing nor had he heard such a refined, smooth, soft voice above all he had
 never seen such delicate whiteness of face or handshands which were broad, but v
ery plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softness Prince Andrew had only se
en on the faces of soldiers who had been long in hospital. This was Speranski, Se
cretary of State, reporter to the Emperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he h
ad more than once met and talked with Napoleon.  Speranski did not shift his eyes
 from one face to another as people involuntarily do on entering a large company 
and was in no hurry to speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would be li
stened to, and he looked only at the person with whom he was conversing.  Prince 
Andrew followed Speranski's every word and movement with particular attention. As
 happens to some people, especially to men who judge those near to them severely,
 he always on meeting anyone newespecially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew b
y reputationexpected to discover in him the perfection of human qualities.  Spera
nski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooner as he had been 
detained at the palace. He did not say that the Emperor had kept him, and Prince 
Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty. When Kochubey introduced Prince Andre
w, Speranski slowly turned his eyes to Bolkonski with his customary smile and loo
ked at him in silence.  "I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of
 you, as everyone has," he said after a pause.  Kochubey said a few words about t
he reception Arakcheev had given Bolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly.  "The
 chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friend Monsieur Magnits
ki," he said, fully articulating every word and syllable, "and if you like I can 
put you in touch with him." He paused at the full stop. "I hope you will find him
 sympathetic and ready to cooperate in promoting all that is reasonable."  A circ
le soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talked about his subordin
ate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.  Prince Andrew without joining in 
the conversation watched every movement of Speranski's this man, not long since a
n insignificant divinity student, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his handsth
ose plump white handsthe fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by the extraord
inarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered the old man. He appear
ed to address condescending words to him from an immeasurable height. When the ol
d man began to speak too loud, Speranski smiled and said he could not judge of th
e advantage or disadvantage of what pleased the sovereign.  Having talked for a l
ittle while in the general circle, Speranski rose and coming up to Prince Andrew 
took him along to the other end of the room. It was clear that he thought it nece
ssary to interest himself in Bolkonski.  "I had no chance to talk with you, Princ
e, during the animated conversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me
," he said with a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smile that 
he and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whom he had
 just been talking. This flattered Prince Andrew. "I have known of you for a long
 time first from your action with regard to your serfs, a first example, of which
 it is very desirable that there should be more imitators and secondly because yo
u are one of those gentlemen of the chamber who have not considered themselves of
fended by the new decree concerning the ranks allotted to courtiers, which is cau
sing so much gossip and tittletattle."  "No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did 
not wish me to take advantage of the privilege. I began the service from the lowe
r grade."  "Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above our co
ntemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishes natural justi
ce."  "I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground," returned Pri
nce Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, of which he began to be consc
ious. He did not like to agree with him in everything and felt a wish to contradi
ct. Though he usually spoke easily and well, he felt a difficulty in expressing h
imself now while talking with Speranski. He was too much absorbed in observing th
e famous man's personality.  "Grounds of personal ambition maybe," Speranski put 
in quietly.  "And of state interest to some extent," said Prince Andrew.  "What d
o you mean?" asked Speranski quietly, lowering his eyes.  "I am an admirer of Mon
tesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and his idea that le principe des monarchies e
st l'honneur me parait incontestable. Certains droits et privileges de la nobless
e me paraissent etre des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment." *        * "The princi
ple of monarchies is honor seems to me      incontestable. Certain rights and pri
vileges for the      aristocracy appear to me a means of maintaining that      se
ntiment."   The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much improv
ed by the change. Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested him.  "Si vous envi
sagez la question sous ce point de vue," * he began, pronouncing French with evid
ent difficulty, and speaking even slower than in Russian but quite calmly.       
* "If you regard the question from that point of view."   Speranski went on to sa
y that honor, l'honeur, cannot be upheld by privileges harmful to the service tha
t honor, l'honneur, is either a negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy
 or it is a source of emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which rec
ognize it. His arguments were concise, simple, and clear.  "An institution uphold
ing honor, the source of emulation, is one similar to the Legion d'honneur of the
 great Emperor Napoleon, not harmful but helpful to the success of the service, b
ut not a class or court privilege."  "I do not dispute that, but it cannot be den
ied that court privileges have attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "E
very courtier considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily."  "Yet y
ou do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince," said Speranski, indic
ating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably an argument which was embarrass
ing for his companion. "If you will do me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday
," he added, "I will, after talking with Magnitski, let you know what may interes
t you, and shall also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."  Closi
ng his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, and trying to attract
 as little attention as possible, he left the room.      CHAPTER VI   During the 
first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt the whole trend of thoug
ht he had formed during his life of seclusion quite overshadowed by the trifling 
cares that engrossed him in that city.  On returning home in the evening he would
 jot down in his notebook four or five necessary calls or appointments for certai
n hours. The mechanism of life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in time ev
erywhere, absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did nothing, did not 
even think or find time to think, but only talked, and talked successfully, of wh
at he had thought while in the country.  He sometimes noticed with dissatisfactio
n that he repeated the same remark on the same day in different circles. But he w
as so busy for whole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thin
king of nothing.  As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubey's, Speranski 
produced a strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, when he received 
him teteatate at his own house and talked to him long and confidentially.  To Bol
konski so many people appeared contemptible and insignificant creatures, and he s
o longed to find in someone the living ideal of that perfection toward which he s
trove, that he readily believed that in Speranski he had found this ideal of a pe
rfectly rational and virtuous man. Had Speranski sprung from the same class as hi
mself and possessed the same breeding and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have d
iscovered his weak, human, unheroic sides but as it was, Speranski's strange and 
logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he did not qu
ite understand him. Moreover, Speranski, either because he appreciated the other'
s capacity or because he considered it necessary to win him to his side, showed o
ff his dispassionate calm reasonableness before Prince Andrew and flattered him w
ith that subtle flattery which goes hand in hand with selfassurance and consists 
in a tacit assumption that one's companion is the only man besides oneself capabl
e of understanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness and pr
ofundity of one's own ideas.  During their long conversation on Wednesday evening
, Speranski more than once remarked "We regard everything that is above the commo
n level of rooted custom..." or, with a smile "But we want the wolves to be fed a
nd the sheep to be safe..." or "They cannot understand this..." and all in a way 
that seemed to say "We, you and I, understand what they are and who we are."  Thi
s first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in Prince Andrew the f
eeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting. He saw in him a rema
rkable, clearthinking man of vast intellect who by his energy and persistence had
 attained power, which he was using solely for the welfare of Russia. In Prince A
ndrew's eyes Speranski was the man he would himself have wished to beone who expl
ained all the facts of life reasonably, considered important only what was ration
al, and was capable of applying the standard of reason to everything. Everything 
seemed so simple and clear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrew involunta
rily agreed with him about everything. If he replied and argued, it was only beca
use he wished to maintain his independence and not submit to Speranski's opinions
 entirely. Everything was right and everything was as it should be only one thing
 disconcerted Prince Andrew. This was Speranski's cold, mirrorlike look, which di
d not allow one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands, which Pri
nce Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those who possess
 power. This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritated Prince Andrew, he
 knew not why. He was unpleasantly struck, too, by the excessive contempt for oth
ers that he observed in Speranski, and by the diversity of lines of argument he u
sed to support his opinions. He made use of every kind of mental device, except a
nalogy, and passed too boldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one to another. N
ow he would take up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers now that
 of a satirist, and laugh ironically at his opponents now grow severely logical, 
or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. This last resource was one he very 
frequently employed. He would transfer a question to metaphysical heights, pass o
n to definitions of space, time, and thought, and, having deduced the refutation 
he needed, would again descend to the level of the original discussion.  In gener
al the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Prince Andrew most was his abs
olute and unshakable belief in the power and authority of reason. It was evident 
that the thought could never occur to him which to Prince Andrew seemed so natura
l, namely, that it is after all impossible to express all one thinks and that he 
had never felt the doubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And it was j
ust this peculiarity of Speranski's mind that particularly attracted Prince Andre
w.  During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt a passionate adm
iration for him similar to that which he had once felt for Bonaparte. The fact th
at Speranski was the son of a village priest, and that stupid people might meanly
 despise him on account of his humble origin as in fact many did, caused Prince A
ndrew to cherish his sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to strengthen 
it.  On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned the Commiss
ion for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told him sarcastically that t
he Commission had existed for a hundred and fifty years, had cost millions, and h
ad done nothing except that Rosenkampf had stuck labels on the corresponding para
graphs of the different codes.  "And that is all the state has for the millions i
t has spent," said he. "We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we h
ave no laws. That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not to serve in th
ese times!"  Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence 
was needed which he did not possess.  "But nobody possesses it, so what would you
 have? It is a vicious circle from which we must break a way out."  A week later 
Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Army Regulations andwhat he had no
t at all expectedwas chairman of a section of the committee for the revision of t
he laws. At Speranski's request he took the first part of the Civil Code that was
 being drawn up and, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Just
inian, he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights.      CHAPTER VII 
  Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to Petersburg after 
visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leading position among 
the Petersburg Freemasons. He arranged dining and funeral lodge meetings, enrolle
d new members, and busied himself uniting various lodges and acquiring authentic 
charters. He gave money for the erection of temples and supplemented as far as he
 could the collection of alms, in regard to which the majority of members were st
ingy and irregular. He supported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had fo
unded in Petersburg.  His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infat
uations and dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he consider
ed it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of the bachelor ci
rcles in which he moved.  Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, ho
wever, Pierre at the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to
 rest upon it, the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him. At t
he same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him the closer bound h
e involuntarily became to the order. When he had joined the Freemasons he had exp
erienced the feeling of one who confidently steps onto the smooth surface of a bo
g. When he put his foot down it sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness of th
e ground, he put his other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, a
nd involuntarily waded kneedeep in the bog.  Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersb
urghe had of late stood aside from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and live
d almost entirely in Moscow. All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew i
n ordinary life, and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers i
n Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D., whom he knew in society
 mostly as weak and insignificant men. Under the Masonic aprons and insignia he s
aw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed in ordinary life. Often after
 collecting alms, and reckoning up twenty to thirty rubles received for the most 
part in promises from a dozen members, of whom half were as well able to pay as h
imself, Pierre remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devot
e all his belongings to his neighbor, and doubts on which he tried not to dwell a
rose in his soul.  He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories. In the f
irst he put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodges or
 in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mystical science of the
 order with questions of the threefold designation of God, the three primordial e
lementssulphur, mercury, and saltor the meaning of the square and all the various
 figures of the temple of Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to whi
ch the elder ones chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexeevich 
himself, but he did not share their interests. His heart was not in the mystical 
aspect of Freemasonry.  In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others
 like him, seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straig
ht and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.  In the third category he include
d those Brothers the majority who saw nothing in Freemasonry but the external for
ms and ceremonies, and prized the strict performance of these forms without troub
ling about their purport or significance. Such were Willarski and even the Grand 
Master of the principal lodge.  Finally, to the fourth category also a great many
 Brothers belonged, particularly those who had lately joined. These according to 
Pierre's observations were men who had no belief in anything, nor desire for anyt
hing, but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthy young Brothe
rs who were influential through their connections or rank, and of whom there were
 very many in the lodge.  Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doin
g. Freemasonry, at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based mere
ly on externals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself, but suspected t
hat Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated from its original princip
les. And so toward the end of the year he went abroad to be initiated into the hi
gher secrets of the order.  In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. 
Our Freemasons knew from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtai
ned the confidence of many highly placed persons, had been initiated into many my
steries, had been raised to a higher grade, and was bringing back with him much t
hat might conduce to the advantage of the Masonic cause in Russia. The Petersburg
 Freemasons all came to see him, tried to ingratiate themselves with him, and it 
seemed to them all that he was preparing something for them and concealing it.  A
 solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at which Pierre p
romised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what he had to deliver to them 
from the highest leaders of their order. The meeting was a full one. After the us
ual ceremonies Pierre rose and began his address.  "Dear Brothers," he began, blu
shing and stammering, with a written speech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to
 observe our mysteries in the seclusion of our lodgewe must actact! We are drowsi
ng, but we must act." Pierre raised his notebook and began to read.  "For the dis
semination of pure truth and to secure the triumph of virtue," he read, "we must 
cleanse men from prejudice, diffuse principles in harmony with the spirit of the 
times, undertake the education of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bond
s with the wisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, a
nd folly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unity of purp
ose and possessed of authority and power.  "To attain this end we must secure a p
reponderance of virtue over vice and must endeavor to secure that the honest man 
may, even in this world, receive a lasting reward for his virtue. But in these gr
eat endeavors we are gravely hampered by the political institutions of today. Wha
t is to be done in these circumstances? To favor revolutions, overthrow everythin
g, repel force by force?... No! We are very far from that. Every violent reform d
eserves censure, for it quite fails to remedy evil while men remain what they are
, and also because wisdom needs no violence.  "The whole plan of our order should
 be based on the idea of preparing men of firmness and virtue bound together by u
nity of convictionaiming at the punishment of vice and folly, and patronizing tal
ent and virtue raising worthy men from the dust and attaching them to our Brother
hood. Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the hands of 
the protectors of disorder and to control them without their being aware of it. I
n a word, we must found a form of government holding universal sway, which should
 be diffused over the whole world without destroying the bonds of citizenship, an
d beside which all other governments can continue in their customary course and d
o everything except what impedes the great aim of our order, which is to obtain f
or virtue the victory over vice. This aim was that of Christianity itself. It tau
ght men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to follow the example and i
nstruction of the best and wisest men.  "At that time, when everything was plunge
d in darkness, preaching alone was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth end
owed her with special strength, but now we need much more powerful methods. It is
 now necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in virtue a charm pa
lpable to those senses. It is impossible to eradicate the passions but we must st
rive to direct them to a noble aim, and it is therefore necessary that everyone s
hould be able to satisfy his passions within the limits of virtue. Our order shou
ld provide means to that end.  "As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men
 in every state, each of them again training two others and all being closely uni
ted, everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secret accom
plished much for the welfare of mankind."  This speech not only made a strong imp
ression, but created excitement in the lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seein
g in it dangerous designs of Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised 
Pierre. The Grand Master began answering him, and Pierre began developing his vie
ws with more and more warmth. It was long since there had been so stormy a meetin
g. Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre of Illuminism, others supporting him
. At that meeting he was struck for the first time by the endless variety of men'
s minds, which prevents a truth from ever presenting itself identically to two pe
rsons. Even those members who seemed to be on his side understood him in their ow
n way with limitations and alterations he could not agree to, as what he always w
anted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himself understood it. 
       * The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for      monarchical inst
itutions.   At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and illwill rep
roved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtue alone, but al
so a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute. Pierre did not answer him 
and asked briefly whether his proposal would be accepted. He was told that it wou
ld not, and without waiting for the usual formalities he left the lodge and went 
home.      CHAPTER VIII   Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so drea
ded. For three days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sof
a at home receiving no one and going nowhere.  It was just then that he received 
a letter from his wife, who implored him to see her, telling him how grieved she 
was about him and how she wished to devote her whole life to him.  At the end of 
the letter she informed him that in a few days she would return to Petersburg fro
m abroad.  Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respecte
d less than the others forced his way in to see him and, turning the conversation
 upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternal advice expressed the opin
ion that his severity to his wife was wrong and that he was neglecting one of the
 first rules of Freemasonry by not forgiving the penitent.  At the same time his 
motherinlaw, Prince Vasili's wife, sent to him imploring him to come if only for 
a few minutes to discuss a most important matter. Pierre saw that there was a con
spiracy against him and that they wanted to reunite him with his wife, and in the
 mood he then was, this was not even unpleasant to him. Nothing mattered to him. 
Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under the influence of the 
depression that possessed him he valued neither his liberty nor his resolution to
 punish his wife.  "No one is right and no one is to blame so she too is not to b
lame," he thought.  If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his 
wife, it was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to take
 any step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away. Compared 
to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of indifference whether he lived wit
h his wife or not?  Without replying either to his wife or his motherinlaw, Pierr
e late one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph Alex
eevich. This is what he noted in his diary   Moscow, 17th November  I have just r
eturned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what I have experienced. Jos
eph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for three years been suffering from a pai
nful disease of the bladder. No one has ever heard him utter a groan or a word of
 complaint. From morning till late at night, except when he eats his very plain f
ood, he is working at science. He received me graciously and made me sit down on 
the bed on which he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of Jerusa
lem, and he responded in the same manner, asking me with a mild smile what I had 
learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges. I told him everything as 
best I could, and told him what I had proposed to our Petersburg lodge, of the ba
d reception I had encountered, and of my rupture with the Brothers. Joseph Alexee
vich, having remained silent and thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of
 the matter, which at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I shou
ld follow. He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of th
e order 1 The preservation and study of the mystery. 2 The purification and refor
mation of oneself for its reception, and 3 The improvement of the human race by s
triving for such purification. Which is the principal aim of these three? Certain
ly selfreformation and selfpurification. Only to this aim can we always strive in
dependently of circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands the grea
test efforts of us and so, led astray by pride, losing sight of this aim, we occu
py ourselves either with the mystery which in our impurity we are unworthy to rec
eive, or seek the reformation of the human race while ourselves setting an exampl
e of baseness and profligacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it 
is attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this ground Joseph Ale
xeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and in the depth of my soul I 
agreed with him. Talking of my family affairs he said to me, "the chief duty of a
 true Mason, as I have told you, lies in perfecting himself. We often think that 
by removing all the difficulties of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim,
 but on the contrary, my dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that 
we can attain our three chief aims 1 Selfknowledgefor man can only know himself b
y comparison, 2 Selfperfecting, which can only be attained by conflict, and 3 The
 attainment of the chief virtuelove of death. Only the vicissitudes of life can s
how us its vanity and develop our innate love of death or of rebirth to a new lif
e." These words are all the more remarkable because, in spite of his great physic
al sufferings, Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death, fo
r whichin spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner manhe does not yet feel 
himself sufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explained to me fully the meani
ng of the Great Square of creation and pointed out to me that the numbers three a
nd seven are the basis of everything. He advised me not to avoid intercourse with
 the Petersburg Brothers, but to take up only secondgrade posts in the lodge, to 
try, while diverting the Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path s
elfknowledge and selfperfecting. Besides this he advised me for myself personally
 above all to keep a watch over myself, and to that end he gave me a notebook, th
e one I am now writing in and in which I will in future note down all my actions.
   Petersburg, 23rd November  I am again living with my wife. My motherinlaw came
 to me in tears and said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear he
r that she was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. I knew that i
f I once let myself see her I should not have strength to go on refusing what she
 wanted. In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice to seek. Had my ben
efactor been here he would have told me what to do. I went to my room and reread 
Joseph Alexeevich's letters and recalled my conversations with him, and deduced f
rom it all that I ought not to refuse a suppliant, and ought to reach a helping h
and to everyoneespecially to one so closely bound to meand that I must bear my cr
oss. But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, then let union with her ha
ve only a spiritual aim. That is what I decided, and what I wrote to Joseph Alexe
evich. I told my wife that I begged her to forget the past, to forgive me whateve
r wrong I may have done her, and that I had nothing to forgive. It gave me joy to
 tell her this. She need not know how hard it was for me to see her again. I have
 settled on the upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling
 of regeneration.      CHAPTER IX   At that time, as always happens, the highest 
society that met at court and at the grand balls was divided into several circles
, each with its own particular tone. The largest of these was the French circle o
f the Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt. In th
is group Helene, as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her husband, took 
a very prominent place. She was visited by the members of the French embassy and 
by many belonging to that circle and noted for their intellect and polished manne
rs.  Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors and had 
brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic notabilities. At Erfurt 
her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himself had noticed her in the theater a
nd said of her "C'est un superbe animal." * Her success as a beautiful and elegan
t woman did not surprise Pierre, for she had become even handsomer than before. W
hat did surprise him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded 
in gaining the reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle que belle." 
*2 The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eightpage letters. Bilibin saved u
p his epigrams to produce them in Countess Bezukhova's presence. To be received i
n the Countess Bezukhova's salon was regarded as a diploma of intellect. Young me
n read books before attending Helene's evenings, to have something to say in her 
salon, and secretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors, confided diplomatic 
secrets to her, so that in a way Helene was a power. Pierre, who knew she was ver
y stupid, sometimes attended, with a strange feeling of perplexity and fear, her 
evenings and dinner parties, where politics, poetry, and philosophy were discusse
d. At these parties his feelings were like those of a conjuror who always expects
 his trick to be found out at any moment. But whether because stupidity was just 
what was needed to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived found ple
asure in the deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene Bezukhova's 
reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly established that she cou
ld say the emptiest and stupidest things and everybody would go into raptures ove
r every word of hers and look for a profound meaning in it of which she herself h
ad no conception.        * "That's a superb animal."       * 2 "Of a charming wom
an, as witty as she is lovely."   Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilli
ant society woman. He was that absentminded crank, a grand seigneur husband who w
as in no one's way, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of
 the drawing room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as an advantag
eous background to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre during the last two years
, as a result of his continual absorption in abstract interests and his sincere c
ontempt for all else, had acquired in his wife's circle, which did not interest h
im, that air of unconcern, indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot
 be acquired artificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect. He entered 
his wife's drawing room as one enters a theater, was acquainted with everybody, e
qually pleased to see everyone, and equally indifferent to them all. Sometimes he
 joined in a conversation which interested him and, regardless of whether any "ge
ntlemen of the embassy" were present or not, lispingly expressed his views, which
 were sometimes not at all in accord with the accepted tone of the moment. But th
e general opinion concerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman i
n Petersburg" was so well established that no one took his freaks seriously.  Amo
ng the many young men who frequented her house every day, Boris Drubetskoy, who h
ad already achieved great success in the service, was the most intimate friend of
 the Bezukhov household since Helene's return from Erfurt. Helene spoke of him as
 "mon page" and treated him like a child. Her smile for him was the same as for e
verybody, but sometimes that smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Boris be
haved with a particularly dignified and sad deference. This shade of deference al
so disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three years before from the mor
tification to which his wife had subjected him that he now protected himself from
 the danger of its repetition, first by not being a husband to his wife, and seco
ndly by not allowing himself to suspect.  "No, now that she has become a bluestoc
king she has finally renounced her former infatuations," he told himself. "There 
has never been an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the
 heart"a statement which, though gathered from an unknown source, he believed imp
licitly. Yet strange to say Boris' presence in his wife's drawing room and he was
 almost always there had a physical effect upon Pierre it constricted his limbs a
nd destroyed the unconsciousness and freedom of his movements.  "What a strange a
ntipathy," thought Pierre, "yet I used to like him very much."  In the eyes of th
e world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather blind and absurd husband of a di
stinguished wife, a clever crank who did nothing but harmed nobody and was a firs
trate, goodnatured fellow. But a complex and difficult process of internal develo
pment was taking place all this time in Pierre's soul, revealing much to him and 
causing him many spiritual doubts and joys.      CHAPTER X   Pierre went on with 
his diary, and this is what he wrote in it during that time   24th November  Got 
up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. By Joseph Alexeevich's 
advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and served on one of the commi
ttees. Returned home for dinner and dined alonethe countess had many visitors I d
o not like. I ate and drank moderately and after dinner copied out some passages 
for the Brothers. In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny sto
ry about B., and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody 
laughed loudly at it.  I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great Go
d, help me to walk in Thy paths, 1 to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation,
 2 to vanquish lust by selfrestraint and repulsion, 3 to withdraw from worldlines
s, but not avoid a the service of the state, b family duties, c relations with my
 friends, and the management of my affairs.   27th November  I got up late. On wa
king I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God, help and strengthen me that I ma
y walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures, but without proper feeling. Brother Urus
ov came and we talked about worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's new pro
jects. I began to criticize them, but remembered my rules and my benefactor's wor
dsthat a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aid is 
required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist. My tongue is my enemy
. Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary talk about the recept
ion of a new Brother. They laid on me the duty of Rhetor. I feel myself weak and 
unworthy. Then our talk turned to the interpretation of the seven pillars and ste
ps of the Temple, the seven sciences, the seven virtues, the seven vices, and the
 seven gifts of the Holy Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the evening the
 admission took place. The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the
 magnificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted. I nomin
ated him and was the Rhetor. A strange feeling agitated me all the time I was alo
ne with him in the dark chamber. I caught myself harboring a feeling of hatred to
ward him which I vainly tried to overcome. That is why I should really like to sa
ve him from evil and lead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of him di
d not leave me. It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was m
erely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge. Apart from the fact 
that he had asked me several times whether N. and S. were members of our lodge a 
question to which I could not reply and that according to my observation he is in
capable of feeling respect for our holy order and is too preoccupied and satisfie
d with the outer man to desire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to doubt him
, but he seemed to me insincere, and all the time I stood alone with him in the d
ark temple it seemed to me that he was smiling contemptuously at my words, and I 
wished really to stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it. I could not be
 eloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the Brothers and to the Grand
 Master. Great Architect of Nature, help me to find the true path out of the laby
rinth of lies!    After this, three pages were left blank in the diary, and then 
the following was written   I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Bro
ther V., who advised me to hold fast by brother A. Though I am unworthy, much was
 revealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohim is the na
me of the ruler of all. The third name is the name unutterable which means the Al
l. Talks with Brother V. strengthen, refresh, and support me in the path of virtu
e. In his presence doubt has no place. The distinction between the poor teachings
 of mundane science and our sacred allembracing teaching is clear to me. Human sc
iences dissect everything to comprehend it, and kill everything to examine it. In
 the holy science of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety and life.
 The Trinitythe three elements of matterare sulphur, mercury, and salt. Sulphur i
s of an oily and fiery nature in combination with salt by its fiery nature it aro
uses a desire in the latter by means of which it attracts mercury, seizes it, hol
ds it, and in combination produces other bodies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, sp
iritual essence. Christ, the Holy Spirit, Him!...   3rd December  Awoke late, rea
d the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards went and paced up and down the lar
ge hall. I wished to meditate, but instead my imagination pictured an occurrence 
of four years ago, when Dolokhov, meeting me in Moscow after our duel, said he ho
ped I was enjoying perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. At the ti
me I gave him no answer. Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in my mi
nd gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I recollected myself and drov
e away that thought only when I found myself glowing with anger, but I did not su
fficiently repent. Afterwards Boris Drubetskoy came and began relating various ad
ventures. His coming vexed me from the first, and I said something disagreeable t
o him. He replied. I flared up and said much that was unpleasant and even rude to
 him. He became silent, and I recollected myself only when it was too late. My Go
d, I cannot get on with him at all. The cause of this is my egotism. I set myself
 above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient to my rudeness whi
le I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God, grant that in his presence 
I may rather see my own vileness, and behave so that he too may benefit. After di
nner I fell asleep and as I was drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my
 left ear, "Thy day!"  I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly 
surrounded by dogs, but I went on undismayed. Suddenly a smallish dog seized my l
eft thigh with its teeth and would not let go. I began to throttle it with my han
ds. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, a bigger one, began biting me. I l
ifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the bigger and heavier it grew. And sudde
nly Brother A. came and, taking my arm, led me to a building to enter which we ha
d to pass along a narrow plank. I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I b
egan to clamber up a fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. After much
 effort I dragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on one side and my body on 
the other. I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and pointing m
e to a broad avenue and garden, and in the garden was a large and beautiful build
ing. I woke up. O Lord, great Architect of Nature, help me to tear from myself th
ese dogsmy passions especially the last, which unites in itself the strength of a
ll the former ones, and aid me to enter that temple of virtue to a vision of whic
h I attained in my dream.   7th December  I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was si
tting in my house, and that I was very glad and wished to entertain him. It seeme
d as if I chattered incessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that th
is could not please him, and I wished to come close to him and embrace him. But a
s soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed and grown young, and he was
 quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order, but so softly that
 I could not hear it. Then it seemed that we all left the room and something stra
nge happened. We were sitting or lying on the floor. He was telling me something,
 and I wished to show him my sensibility, and not listening to what he was saying
 I began picturing to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God s
anctifying me. And tears came into my eyes, and I was glad he noticed this. But h
e looked at me with vexation and jumped up, breaking off his remarks. I felt abas
hed and asked whether what he had been saying did not concern me but he did not r
eply, gave me a kind look, and then we suddenly found ourselves in my bedroom whe
re there is a double bed. He lay down on the edge of it and I burned with longing
 to caress him and lie down too. And he said, "Tell me frankly what is your chief
 temptation? Do you know it? I think you know it already." Abashed by this questi
on, I replied that sloth was my chief temptation. He shook his head incredulously
 and even more abashed, I said that though I was living with my wife as he advise
d, I was not living with her as her husband. To this he replied that one should n
ot deprive a wife of one's embraces and gave me to understand that that was my du
ty. But I replied that I should be ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything vani
shed. And I awoke and found in my mind the text from the Gospel "The life was the
 light of men. And the light shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehended it
 not." Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young and bright. That day I received 
a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about "conjugal duties."   9th Dece
mber  I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I saw that I was i
n Moscow in my house, in the big sitting room, and Joseph Alexeevich came in from
 the drawing room. I seemed to know at once that the process of regeneration had 
already taken place in him, and I rushed to meet him. I embraced him and kissed h
is hands, and he said, "Hast thou noticed that my face is different?" I looked at
 him, still holding him in my arms, and saw that his face was young, but that he 
had no hair on his head and his features were quite changed. And I said, "I shoul
d have known you had I met you by chance," and I thought to myself, "Am I telling
 the truth?" And suddenly I saw him lying like a dead body then he gradually reco
vered and went with me into my study carrying a large book of sheets of drawing p
aper I said, "I drew that," and he answered by bowing his head. I opened the book
, and on all the pages there were excellent drawings. And in my dream I knew that
 these drawings represented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved. And
 on its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent garment
s and with a transparent body, flying up to the clouds. And I seemed to know that
 this maiden was nothing else than a representation of the Song of Songs. And loo
king at those drawings I dreamed I felt that I was doing wrong, but could not tea
r myself away from them. Lord, help me! My God, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing,
 Thy will be done but if I am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shal
l perish of my debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!      CHAPTER XI   The Ros
tovs' monetary affairs had not improved during the two years they had spent in th
e country.  Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and was stil
l serving modestly in an obscure regiment, spending comparatively little, the way
 of life at OtradnoeMitenka's management of affairs, in particularwas such that t
he debts inevitably increased every year. The only resource obviously presenting 
itself to the old count was to apply for an official post, so he had come to Pete
rsburg to look for one and also, as he said, to let the lassies enjoy themselves 
for the last time.  Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera 
and was accepted.  Though in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to the best society with
out themselves giving it a thought, yet in Petersburg their circle of acquaintanc
es was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersburg they were provincials, and the v
ery people they had entertained in Moscow without inquiring to what set they belo
nged, here looked down on them.  The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in 
Petersburg as in Moscow, and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Countr
y neighbors from Otradnoe, impoverished old squires and their daughters, Peronska
ya a maid of honor, Pierre Bezukhov, and the son of their district postmaster who
 had obtained a post in Petersburg. Among the men who very soon became frequent v
isitors at the Rostovs' house in Petersburg were Boris, Pierre whom the count had
 met in the street and dragged home with him, and Berg who spent whole days at th
e Rostovs' and paid the eldest daughter, Countess Vera, the attentions a young ma
n pays when he intends to propose.  Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his righ
t hand wounded at Austerlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. 
He narrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air that everyo
ne believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and he had obtained two deco
rations for Austerlitz.  In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himsel
f. He had picked up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aidedecamp standing
 near the commander in chief and had taken it to his commander. Just as he had do
ne after Austerlitz, he related this occurrence at such length and so insistently
 that everyone again believed it had been necessary to do this, and he received t
wo decorations for the Finnish war also. In 1809 he was a captain in the Guards, 
wore medals, and held some special lucrative posts in Petersburg.  Though some sk
eptics smiled when told of Berg's merits, it could not be denied that he was a pa
instaking and brave officer, on excellent terms with his superiors, and a moral y
oung man with a brilliant career before him and an assured position in society.  
Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a Moscow theater, Be
rg had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and had said in German, "das soll mein Wei
b werden," * and from that moment had made up his mind to marry her. Now in Peter
sburg, having considered the Rostovs' position and his own, he decided that the t
ime had come to propose.       * "That girl shall be my wife."   Berg's proposal 
was at first received with a perplexity that was not flattering to him. At first 
it seemed strange that the son of an obscure Livonian gentleman should propose ma
rriage to a Countess Rostova but Berg's chief characteristic was such a naive and
 good natured egotism that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it would be a 
good thing, since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was good, indeed exc
ellent. Moreover, the Rostovs' affairs were seriously embarrassed, as the suitor 
could not but know and above all, Vera was twentyfour, had been taken out everywh
ere, and though she was certainly goodlooking and sensible, no one up to now had 
proposed to her. So they gave their consent.  "You see," said Berg to his comrade
, whom he called "friend" only because he knew that everyone has friends, "you se
e, I have considered it all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out
 or if it were in any way unsuitable. But on the contrary, my papa and mamma are 
now provided forI have arranged that rent for them in the Baltic Provincesand I c
an live in Petersburg on my pay, and with her fortune and my good management we c
an get along nicely. I am not marrying for moneyI consider that dishonorablebut a
 wife should bring her share and a husband his. I have my position in the service
, she has connections and some means. In our times that is worth something, isn't
 it? But above all, she is a handsome, estimable girl, and she loves me..."  Berg
 blushed and smiled.  "And I love her, because her character is sensible and very
 good. Now the other sister, though they are the same family, is quite differenta
n unpleasant character and has not the same intelligence. She is so... you know?.
.. Unpleasant... But my fiancee!... Well, you will be coming," he was going to sa
y, "to dine," but changed his mind and said "to take tea with us," and quickly do
ubling up his tongue he blew a small round ring of tobacco smoke, perfectly embod
ying his dream of happiness.  After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in th
e parents by Berg's proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times 
took possession of the family, but the rejoicing was external and insincere. In t
he family's feeling toward this wedding a certain awkwardness and constraint was 
evident, as if they were ashamed of not having loved Vera sufficiently and of bei
ng so ready to get her off their hands. The old count felt this most. He would pr
obably have been unable to state the cause of his embarrassment, but it resulted 
from the state of his affairs. He did not know at all how much he had, what his d
ebts amounted to, or what dowry he could give Vera. When his daughters were born 
he had assigned to each of them, for her dowry, an estate with three hundred serf
s but one of these estates had already been sold, and the other was mortgaged and
 the interest so much in arrears that it would have to be sold, so that it was im
possible to give it to Vera. Nor had he any money.  Berg had already been engaged
 a month, and only a week remained before the wedding, but the count had not yet 
decided in his own mind the question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about i
t. At one time the count thought of giving her the Ryazan estate or of selling a 
forest, at another time of borrowing money on a note of hand. A few days before t
he wedding Berg entered the count's study early one morning and, with a pleasant 
smile, respectfully asked his future fatherinlaw to let him know what Vera's dowr
y would be. The count was so disconcerted by this longforeseen inquiry that witho
ut consideration he gave the first reply that came into his head. "I like your be
ing businesslike about it.... I like it. You shall be satisfied...."  And patting
 Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end the conversation. But Berg, smili
ng pleasantly, explained that if he did not know for certain how much Vera would 
have and did not receive at least part of the dowry in advance, he would have to 
break matters off.  "Because, consider, Countif I allowed myself to marry now wit
hout having definite means to maintain my wife, I should be acting badly...."  Th
e conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous and to avoid further
 importunity, saying that he would give a note of hand for eighty thousand rubles
. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on the shoulder, and said that he was very
 grateful, but that it was impossible for him to arrange his new life without rec
eiving thirty thousand in ready money. "Or at least twenty thousand, Count," he a
dded, "and then a note of hand for only sixty thousand."  "Yes, yes, all right!" 
said the count hurriedly. "Only excuse me, my dear fellow, I'll give you twenty t
housand and a note of hand for eighty thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me."      
CHAPTER XII   Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to whic
h she had counted on her fingers with Boris after they had kissed four years ago.
 Since then she had not seen him. Before Sonya and her mother, if Boris happened 
to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of that episode as of some childish, long
forgotten matter that was not worth mentioning. But in the secret depths of her s
oul the question whether her engagement to Boris was a jest or an important, bind
ing promise tormented her.  Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he h
ad not seen the Rostovs. He had been in Moscow several times, and had passed near
 Otradnoe, but had never been to see them.  Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that
 he did not wish to see her, and this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in
 which her elders spoke of him.  "Nowadays old friends are not remembered," the c
ountess would say when Boris was mentioned.  Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late vi
sited them less frequently, seemed to hold herself with particular dignity, and a
lways spoke rapturously and gratefully of the merits of her son and the brilliant
 career on which he had entered. When the Rostovs came to Petersburg Boris called
 on them.  He drove to their house in some agitation. The memory of Natasha was h
is most poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention of letting her a
nd her parents feel that the childish relations between himself and Natasha could
 not be binding either on her or on him. He had a brilliant position in society t
hanks to his intimacy with Countess Bezukhova, a brilliant position in the servic
e thanks to the patronage of an important personage whose complete confidence he 
enjoyed, and he was beginning to make plans for marrying one of the richest heire
sses in Petersburg, plans which might very easily be realized. When he entered th
e Rostovs' drawing room Natasha was in her own room. When she heard of his arriva
l she almost ran into the drawing room, flushed and beaming with a more than cord
ial smile.  Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining fro
m under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had known her four yea
rs before and so he was taken aback when quite a different Natasha entered, and h
is face expressed rapturous astonishment. This expression on his face pleased Nat
asha.  "Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?" asked the countess. 
 Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at the change in her
.  "How handsome you have grown!"  "I should think so!" replied Natasha's laughin
g eyes.  "And is Papa older?" she asked.  Natasha sat down and, without joining i
n Boris' conversation with the countess, silently and minutely studied her childh
ood's suitor. He felt the weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and g
lanced at her occasionally.  Boris' uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his hair was
 brushed were all comme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natasha noticed a
t once. He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess, arranging wi
th his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left hand like a skin, a
nd he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his lips about the amuseme
nts of the highest Petersburg society, recalling with mild irony old times in Mos
cow and Moscow acquaintances. It was not accidentally, Natasha felt, that he allu
ded, when speaking of the highest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball he had att
ended, and to invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S.  All this time Natas
ha sat silent, glancing up at him from under her brows. This gaze disturbed and c
onfused Boris more and more. He looked round more frequently toward her, and brok
e off in what he was saying. He did not stay more than ten minutes, then rose and
 took his leave. The same inquisitive, challenging, and rather mocking eyes still
 looked at him. After his first visit Boris said to himself that Natasha attracte
d him just as much as ever, but that he must not yield to that feeling, because t
o marry her, a girl almost without fortune, would mean ruin to his career, while 
to renew their former relations without intending to marry her would be dishonora
ble. Boris made up his mind to avoid meeting Natasha, but despite that resolution
 he called again a few days later and began calling often and spending whole days
 at the Rostovs'. It seemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with Nata
sha and tell her that the old times must be forgotten, that in spite of everythin
g... she could not be his wife, that he had no means, and they would never let he
r marry him. But he failed to do so and felt awkward about entering on such an ex
planation. From day to day he became more and more entangled. It seemed to her mo
ther and Sonya that Natasha was in love with Boris as of old. She sang him his fa
vorite songs, showed him her album, making him write in it, did not allow him to 
allude to the past, letting it be understood how delightful was the present and e
very day he went away in a fog, without having said what he meant to, and not kno
wing what he was doing or why he came, or how it would all end. He left off visit
ing Helene and received reproachful notes from her every day, and yet he continue
d to spend whole days with the Rostovs.      CHAPTER XIII   One night when the ol
d countess, in nightcap and dressing jacket, without her false curls, and with he
r poor little knob of hair showing under her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and 
groaning on a rug and bowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natash
a, also in a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair in curlp
apers, ran in. The countessher prayerful mood dispelledlooked round and frowned. 
She was finishing her last prayer "Can it be that this couch will be my grave?" N
atasha, flushed and eager, seeing her mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush
, half sat down, and unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seei
ng that her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and, rapidly sl
ipping one little foot against the other, pushed off her slippers and jumped onto
 the bed the countess had feared might become her grave. This couch was high, wit
h a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than the one below. Natasha jumped 
on it, sank into the feather bed, rolled over to the wall, and began snuggling up
 the bedclothes as she settled down, raising her knees to her chin, kicking out a
nd laughing almost inaudibly, now covering herself up head and all, and now peepi
ng at her mother. The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a st
ern face, but seeing, that Natasha's head was covered, she smiled in her kind, we
ak way.  "Now then, now then!" said she.  "Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said 
Natasha. "Now, just one on your throat and another... that'll do!" And seizing he
r mother round the neck, she kissed her on the throat. In her behavior to her mot
her Natasha seemed rough, but she was so sensitive and tactful that however she c
lasped her mother she always managed to do it without hurting her or making her f
eel uncomfortable or displeased.  "Well, what is it tonight?" said the mother, ha
ving arranged her pillows and waited until Natasha, after turning over a couple o
f times, had settled down beside her under the quilt, spread out her arms, and as
sumed a serious expression.  These visits of Natasha's at night before the count 
returned from his club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother, and dau
ghter.  "What is it tonight?But I have to tell you..."  Natasha put her hand on h
er mother's mouth.  "About Boris... I know," she said seriously "that's what I ha
ve come about. Don't say itI know. No, do tell me!" and she removed her hand. "Te
ll me, Mamma! He's nice?"  "Natasha, you are sixteen. At your age I was married. 
You say Boris is nice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But what then?
... What are you thinking about? You have quite turned his head, I can see that..
.."  As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter. Natasha was lyin
g looking steadily straight before her at one of the mahogany sphinxes carved on 
the corners of the bedstead, so that the countess only saw her daughter's face in
 profile. That face struck her by its peculiarly serious and concentrated express
ion.  Natasha was listening and considering.  "Well, what then?" said she.  "You 
have quite turned his head, and why? What do you want of him? You know you can't 
marry him."  "Why not?" said Natasha, without changing her position.  "Because he
 is young, because he is poor, because he is a relation... and because you yourse
lf don't love him."  "How do you know?"  "I know. It is not right, darling!"   "B
ut if I want to..." said Natasha.  "Leave off talking nonsense," said the countes
s.  "But if I want to..."  "Natasha, I am in earnest..."  Natasha did not let her
 finish. She drew the countess' large hand to her, kissed it on the back and then
 on the palm, then again turned it over and began kissing first one knuckle, then
 the space between the knuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, "January, Feb
ruary, March, April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't you say anything? Speak!" said 
she, turning to her mother, who was tenderly gazing at her daughter and in that c
ontemplation seemed to have forgotten all she had wished to say.  "It won't do, m
y love! Not everyone will understand this friendship dating from your childish da
ys, and to see him so intimate with you may injure you in the eyes of other young
 men who visit us, and above all it torments him for nothing. He may already have
 found a suitable and wealthy match, and now he's half crazy."  "Crazy?" repeated
 Natasha.  "I'll tell you some things about myself. I had a cousin..."  "I know! 
Cyril Matveich... but he is old."  "He was not always old. But this is what I'll 
do, Natasha, I'll have a talk with Boris. He need not come so often...."  "Why no
t, if he likes to?"  "Because I know it will end in nothing...."  "How can you kn
ow? No, Mamma, don't speak to him! What nonsense!" said Natasha in the tone of on
e being deprived of her property. "Well, I won't marry, but let him come if he en
joys it and I enjoy it." Natasha smiled and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, 
but just so," she added.  "How so, my pet?"  "Just so. There's no need for me to 
marry him. But... just so."  "Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shaki
ng all over, she went off into a good humored, unexpected, elderly laugh.  "Don't
 laugh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're shaking the whole bed! You're awfully like 
me, just such another giggler.... Wait..." and she seized the countess' hands and
 kissed a knuckle of the little finger, saying, "June," and continued, kissing, "
July, August," on the other hand. "But, Mamma, is he very much in love? What do y
ou think? Was anybody ever so much in love with you? And he's very nice, very, ve
ry nice. Only not quite my tastehe is so narrow, like the diningroom clock.... Do
n't you understand? Narrow, you knowgray, light gray..."  "What rubbish you're ta
lking!" said the countess.  Natasha continued "Don't you really understand? Nicho
las would understand.... Bezukhov, now, is blue, darkblue and red, and he is squa
re."  "You flirt with him too," said the countess, laughing.  "No, he is a Freema
son, I have found out. He is fine, darkblue and red.... How can I explain it to y
ou?"  "Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door. "You're n
ot asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers, and ran barefoot to her 
own room.  It was a long time before she could sleep. She kept thinking that no o
ne could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.  "Sonya?" s
he thought, glancing at that curledup, sleeping little kitten with her enormous p
lait of hair. "No, how could she? She's virtuous. She fell in love with Nicholas 
and does not wish to know anything more. Even Mamma does not understand. It is wo
nderful how clever I am and how... charming she is," she went on, speaking of her
self in the third person, and imagining it was some very wise manthe wisest and b
est of menwho was saying it of her. "There is everything, everything in her," con
tinued this man. "She is unusually intelligent, charming... and then she is prett
y, uncommonly pretty, and agileshe swims and rides splendidly... and her voice! O
ne can really say it's a wonderful voice!"  She hummed a scrap from her favorite 
opera by Cherubini, threw herself on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought tha
t she would immediately fall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out the cand
le, and before Dunyasha had left the room had already passed into yet another hap
pier world of dreams, where everything was as light and beautiful as in reality, 
and even more so because it was different.   Next day the countess called Boris a
side and had a talk with him, after which he ceased coming to the Rostovs'.      
CHAPTER XIV   On the thirtyfirst of December, New Year's Eve, 1809  10 an old gra
ndee of Catherine's day was giving a ball and midnight supper. The diplomatic cor
ps and the Emperor himself were to be present.  The grandee's wellknown mansion o
n the English Quay glittered with innumerable lights. Police were stationed at th
e brightly lit entrance which was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes
 but dozens of police officers and even the police master himself stood at the po
rch. Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving, with redliveried footme
n and footmen in plumed hats. From the carriages emerged men wearing uniforms, st
ars, and ribbons, while ladies in satin and ermine cautiously descended the carri
age steps which were let down for them with a clatter, and then walked hurriedly 
and noiselessly over the baize at the entrance.  Almost every time a new carriage
 drove up a whisper ran through the crowd and caps were doffed.  "The Emperor?...
 No, a minister.... prince... ambassador. Don't you see the plumes?..." was whisp
ered among the crowd.  One person, better dressed than the rest, seemed to know e
veryone and mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day.  A third of th
e visitors had already arrived, but the Rostovs, who were to be present, were sti
ll hurrying to get dressed.  There had been many discussions and preparations for
 this ball in the Rostov family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive,
 that the dresses would not be ready, or that something would not be arranged as 
it should be.  Marya Ignatevna Peronskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor at th
e court of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of the countess and
 piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg high society, was to accompany them
 to the ball.  They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at t
en o'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls were not yet dr
essed.  Natasha was going to her first grand ball. She had got up at eight that m
orning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day. All her powers
 since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that they allshe herself, Mamma,
 and Sonyashould be as well dressed as possible. Sonya and her mother put themsel
ves entirely in her hands. The countess was to wear a claretcolored velvet dress,
 and the two girls white gauze over pink silk slips, with roses on their bodices 
and their hair dressed a la grecque.  Everything essential had already been done 
feet, hands, necks, and ears washed, perfumed, and powdered, as befits a ball the
 openwork silk stockings and white satin shoes with ribbons were already on the h
airdressing was almost done. Sonya was finishing dressing and so was the countess
, but Natasha, who had bustled about helping them all, was behindhand. She was st
ill sitting before a lookingglass with a dressing jacket thrown over her slender 
shoulders. Sonya stood ready dressed in the middle of the room and, pressing the 
head of a pin till it hurt her dainty finger, was fixing on a last ribbon that sq
ueaked as the pin went through it.  "That's not the way, that's not the way, Sony
a!" cried Natasha turning her head and clutching with both hands at her hair whic
h the maid who was dressing it had not time to release. "That bow is not right. C
ome here!"  Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently.  "Allow 
me, Miss! I can't do it like that," said the maid who was holding Natasha's hair.
  "Oh, dear! Well then, wait. That's right, Sonya."  "Aren't you ready? It is nea
rly ten," came the countess' voice.  "Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?"  "I ha
ve only my cap to pin on."  "Don't do it without me!" called Natasha. "You won't 
do it right."  "But it's already ten."  They had decided to be at the ball by hal
f past ten, and Natasha had still to get dressed and they had to call at the Taur
ida Gardens.  When her hair was done, Natasha, in her short petticoat from under 
which her dancing shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing jacket, ran up to So
nya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother. Turning her mother's head this 
way and that, she fastened on the cap and, hurriedly kissing her gray hair, ran b
ack to the maids who were turning up the hem of her skirt.  The cause of the dela
y was Natasha's skirt, which was too long. Two maids were turning up the hem and 
hurriedly biting off the ends of thread. A third with pins in her mouth was runni
ng about between the countess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossa
mer garment up high on one uplifted hand.  "Mavra, quicker, darling!"  "Give me m
y thimble, Miss, from there..."  "Whenever will you be ready?" asked the count co
ming to the door. "Here is some scent. Peronskaya must be tired of waiting."  "It
's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up the shortened gauze dress with two fin
gers, and blowing and shaking something off it, as if by this to express a consci
ousness of the airiness and purity of what she held.  Natasha began putting on th
e dress.  "In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, Papa!" she cried to her fathe
r as he opened the doorspeaking from under the filmy skirt which still covered he
r whole face.  Sonya slammed the door to. A minute later they let the count in. H
e was wearing a blue swallowtail coat, shoes and stockings, and was perfumed and 
his hair pomaded.  "Oh, Papa! how nice you look! Charming!" cried Natasha, as she
 stood in the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze.  "If you p
lease, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees was pulling the skirt str
aight and shifting the pins from one side of her mouth to the other with her tong
ue.  "Say what you like," exclaimed Sonya, in a despairing voice as she looked at
 Natasha, "say what you like, it's still too long."  Natasha stepped back to look
 at herself in the pier glass. The dress was too long.  "Really, madam, it is not
 at all too long," said Mavra, crawling on her knees after her young lady.  "Well
, if it's too long we'll take it up... we'll tack it up in one minute," said the 
resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuck on the front of her little shawl
 and, still kneeling on the floor, set to work once more.  At that moment, with s
oft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her cap and velvet gown.  "Oooo, my bea
uty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better than any of you!"  He would have emb
raced her but, blushing, she stepped aside fearing to be rumpled.  "Mamma, your c
ap, more to this side," said Natasha. "I'll arrange it," and she rushed forward s
o that the maids who were tacking up her skirt could not move fast enough and a p
iece of gauze was torn off.  "Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not m
y fault!"  "Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha.  "What a b
eautya very queen!" said the nurse as she came to the door. "And Sonya! They are 
lovely!"  At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages and started
. But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens.  Peronskaya was quite ready.
 In spite of her age and plainness she had gone through the same process as the R
ostovs, but with less flurryfor to her it was a matter of routine. Her ugly old b
ody was washed, perfumed, and powdered in just the same way. She had washed behin
d her ears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawing room in her yellow
 dress, wearing her badge as maid of honor, her old lady's maid was as full of ra
pturous admiration as the Rostovs' servants had been.  She praised the Rostovs' t
oilets. They praised her taste and toilet, and at eleven o'clock, careful of thei
r coiffures and dresses, they settled themselves in their carriages and drove off
.      CHAPTER XV   Natasha had not had a moment free since early morning and had
 not once had time to think of what lay before her.  In the damp chill air and cr
owded closeness of the swaying carriage, she for the first time vividly imagined 
what was in store for her there at the ball, in those brightly lighted roomswith 
music, flowers, dances, the Emperor, and all the brilliant young people of Peters
burg. The prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true, s
o out of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of the carriage. Sh
e understood all that awaited her only when, after stepping over the red baize at
 the entrance, she entered the hall, took off her fur cloak, and, beside Sonya an
d in front of her mother, mounted the brightly illuminated stairs between the flo
wers. Only then did she remember how she must behave at a ball, and tried to assu
me the majestic air she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion. 
But, fortunately for her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw nothing clearl
y, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed at her heart. S
he could not assume that pose, which would have made her ridiculous, and she move
d on almost fainting from excitement and trying with all her might to conceal it.
 And this was the very attitude that became her best. Before and behind them othe
r visitors were entering, also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses. The
 mirrors on the landing reflected ladies in white, paleblue, and pink dresses, wi
th diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.  Natasha looked in the mirro
rs and could not distinguish her reflection from the others. All was blended into
 one brilliant procession. On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices, fo
otsteps, and greetings deafened Natasha, and the light and glitter dazzled her st
ill more. The host and hostess, who had already been standing at the door for hal
f an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals, "Charme de vous voir,
" * greeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the same manner.       * "Delighted to 
see you."   The two girls in their white dresses, each with a rose in her black h
air, both curtsied in the same way, but the hostess' eye involuntarily rested lon
ger on the slim Natasha. She looked at her and gave her alone a special smile in 
addition to her usual smile as hostess. Looking at her she may have recalled the 
golden, irrecoverable days of her own girlhood and her own first ball. The host a
lso followed Natasha with his eyes and asked the count which was his daughter.  "
Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.  In the ballroom guests stoo
d crowding at the entrance doors awaiting the Emperor. The countess took up a pos
ition in one of the front rows of that crowd. Natasha heard and felt that several
 people were asking about her and looking at her. She realized that those noticin
g her liked her, and this observation helped to calm her.  "There are some like o
urselves and some worse," she thought.  Peronskaya was pointing out to the counte
ss the most important people at the ball.  "That is the Dutch ambassador, do you 
see? That grayhaired man," she said, indicating an old man with a profusion of si
lvergray curly hair, who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said. 
 "Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersburg, Countess Bezukhova," said Peronskaya,
 indicating Helene who had just entered. "How lovely! She is quite equal to Marya
 Antonovna. See how the men, young and old, pay court to her. Beautiful and cleve
r... they say Princeis quite mad about her. But see, those two, though not goodlo
oking, are even more run after."  She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room
 followed by a very plain daughter.  "She is a splendid match, a millionairess," 
said Peronskaya. "And look, here come her suitors."  "That is Bezukhova's brother
, Anatole Kuragin," she said, indicating a handsome officer of the Horse Guards w
ho passed by them with head erect, looking at something over the heads of the lad
ies. "He's handsome, isn't he? I hear they will marry him to that rich girl. But 
your cousin, Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her. They say she has millions
. Oh yes, that's the French ambassador himself!" she replied to the countess' inq
uiry about Caulaincourt. "Looks as if he were a king! All the same, the French ar
e charming, very charming. No one more charming in society. Ah, here she is! Yes,
 she is still the most beautiful of them all, our Marya Antonovna! And how simply
 she is dressed! Lovely! And that stout one in spectacles is the universal Freema
son," she went on, indicating Pierre. "Put him beside his wife and he looks a reg
ular buffoon!"  Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through the 
crowd and nodding to right and left as casually and goodnaturedly as if he were p
assing through a crowd at a fair. He pushed through, evidently looking for someon
e.  Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "the buffoon," as Per
onskaya had called him, and knew he was looking for them, and for her in particul
ar. He had promised to be at the ball and introduce partners to her.  But before 
he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome, dark man of middle height,
 and in a white uniform, who stood by a window talking to a tall man wearing star
s and a ribbon. Natasha at once recognized the shorter and younger man in the whi
te uniform it was Bolkonski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger, happie
r, and betterlooking.  "There's someone else we knowBolkonski, do you see, Mamma?
" said Natasha, pointing out Prince Andrew. "You remember, he stayed a night with
 us at Otradnoe."  "Oh, you know him?" said Peronskaya. "I can't bear him. Il fai
t a present la pluie et le beau temps. * He's too proud for anything. Takes after
 his father. And he's hand in glove with Speranski, writing some project or other
. Just look how he treats the ladies! There's one talking to him and he has turne
d away," she said, pointing at him. "I'd give it to him if he treated me as he do
es those ladies."       * "He is all the rage just now."      CHAPTER XVI   Sudde
nly everybody stirred, began talking, and pressed forward and then back, and betw
een the two rows, which separated, the Emperor entered to the sounds of music tha
t had immediately struck up. Behind him walked his host and hostess. He walked in
 rapidly, bowing to right and left as if anxious to get the first moments of the 
reception over. The band played the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of
 the words that had been set to it, beginning "Alexander, Elisaveta, all our hear
ts you ravish quite..." The Emperor passed on to the drawing room, the crowd made
 a rush for the doors, and several persons with excited faces hurried there and b
ack again. Then the crowd hastily retired from the drawingroom door, at which the
 Emperor reappeared talking to the hostess. A young man, looking distraught, poun
ced down on the ladies, asking them to move aside. Some ladies, with faces betray
ing complete forgetfulness of all the rules of decorum, pushed forward to the det
riment of their toilets. The men began to choose partners and take their places f
or the polonaise.  Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smiling out of the d
rawing room leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the music. Th
e host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina then came ambassadors, ministers,
 and various generals, whom Peronskaya diligently named. More than half the ladie
s already had partners and were taking up, or preparing to take up, their positio
ns for the polonaise. Natasha felt that she would be left with her mother and Son
ya among a minority of women who crowded near the wall, not having been invited t
o dance. She stood with her slender arms hanging down, her scarcely defined bosom
 rising and falling regularly, and with bated breath and glittering, frightened e
yes gazed straight before her, evidently prepared for the height of joy or misery
. She was not concerned about the Emperor or any of those great people whom Peron
skaya was pointing outshe had but one thought "Is it possible no one will ask me,
 that I shall not be among the first to dance? Is it possible that not one of all
 these men will notice me? They do not even seem to see me, or if they do they lo
ok as if they were saying, 'Ah, she's not the one I'm after, so it's not worth lo
oking at her!' No, it's impossible," she thought. "They must know how I long to d
ance, how splendidly I dance, and how they would enjoy dancing with me."  The str
ains of the polonaise, which had continued for a considerable time, had begun to 
sound like a sad reminiscence to Natasha's ears. She wanted to cry. Peronskaya ha
d left them. The count was at the other end of the room. She and the countess and
 Sonya were standing by themselves as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd o
f strangers, with no one interested in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince Andr
ew with a lady passed by, evidently not recognizing them. The handsome Anatole wa
s smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at Natasha as one looks at
 a wall. Boris passed them twice and each time turned away. Berg and his wife, wh
o were not dancing, came up to them.  This family gathering seemed humiliating to
 Natashaas if there were nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball
. She did not listen to or look at Vera, who was telling her something about her 
own green dress.  At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner he had danc
ed with three and the music ceased. A worried aidedecamp ran up to the Rostovs re
questing them to stand farther back, though as it was they were already close to 
the wall, and from the gallery resounded the distinct, precise, enticingly rhythm
ical strains of a waltz. The Emperor looked smilingly down the room. A minute pas
sed but no one had yet begun dancing. An aidedecamp, the Master of Ceremonies, we
nt up to Countess Bezukhova and asked her to dance. She smilingly raised her hand
 and laid it on his shoulder without looking at him. The aidedecamp, an adept in 
his art, grasping his partner firmly round her waist, with confident deliberation
 started smoothly, gliding first round the edge of the circle, then at the corner
 of the room he caught Helene's left hand and turned her, the only sound audible,
 apart from the everquickening music, being the rhythmic click of the spurs on hi
s rapid, agile feet, while at every third beat his partner's velvet dress spread 
out and seemed to flash as she whirled round. Natasha gazed at them and was ready
 to cry because it was not she who was dancing that first turn of the waltz.  Pri
nce Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearing stockings and danc
ing shoes, stood looking animated and bright in the front row of the circle not f
ar from the Rostovs. Baron Firhoff was talking to him about the first sitting of 
the Council of State to be held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected
 with Speranski and participating in the work of the legislative commission, coul
d give reliable information about that sitting, concerning which various rumors w
ere current. But not listening to what Firhoff was saying, he was gazing now at t
he sovereign and now at the men intending to dance who had not yet gathered coura
ge to enter the circle.  Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Empe
ror's presence, and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to dance.
  Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm.  "You always dance. I have a p
rotegee, the young Rostova, here. Ask her," he said.  "Where is she?" asked Bolko
nski. "Excuse me!" he added, turning to the baron, "we will finish this conversat
ion elsewhereat a ball one must dance." He stepped forward in the direction Pierr
e indicated. The despairing, dejected expression of Natasha's face caught his eye
. He recognized her, guessed her feelings, saw that it was her debut, remembered 
her conversation at the window, and with an expression of pleasure on his face ap
proached Countess Rostova.  "Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," said the 
countess, with heightened color.  "I have the pleasure of being already acquainte
d, if the countess remembers me," said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow
 quite belying Peronskaya's remarks about his rudeness, and approaching Natasha h
e held out his arm to grasp her waist before he had completed his invitation. He 
asked her to waltz. That tremulous expression on Natasha's face, prepared either 
for despair or rapture, suddenly brightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smi
le.  "I have long been waiting for you," that frightened happy little girl seemed
 to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as she raised her hand t
o Prince Andrew's shoulder. They were the second couple to enter the circle. Prin
ce Andrew was one of the best dancers of his day and Natasha danced exquisitely. 
Her little feet in their white satin dancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightl
y, and independently of herself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness. H
er slender bare arms and neck were not beautifulcompared to Helene's her shoulder
s looked thin and her bosom undeveloped. But Helene seemed, as it were, hardened 
by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scanned her person, while Na
tasha was like a girl exposed for the first time, who would have felt very much a
shamed had she not been assured that this was absolutely necessary.  Prince Andre
w liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly as possible from the political 
and clever talk which everyone addressed to him, wishing also to break up the cir
cle of restraint he disliked, caused by the Emperor's presence, he danced, and ha
d chosen Natasha because Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the fi
rst pretty girl who caught his eye but scarcely had he embraced that slender supp
le figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smiling so near him than the 
wine of her charm rose to his head, and he felt himself revived and rejuvenated w
hen after leaving her he stood breathing deeply and watching the other dancers.  
    CHAPTER XVII   After Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for a dance,
 and then the aidedecamp who had opened the ball, and several other young men, so
 that, flushed and happy, and passing on her superfluous partners to Sonya, she d
id not cease dancing all the evening. She noticed and saw nothing of what occupie
d everyone else. Not only did she fail to notice that the Emperor talked a long t
ime with the French ambassador, and how particularly gracious he was to a certain
 lady, or that Prince Soandso and Soandso did and said this and that, and that He
lene had great success and was honored by the special attention of Soandso, but s
he did not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had gone because the ba
ll became livelier after his departure. For one of the merry cotillions before su
pper Prince Andrew was again her partner. He reminded her of their first encounte
r in the Otradnoe avenue, and how she had been unable to sleep that moonlight nig
ht, and told her how he had involuntarily overheard her. Natasha blushed at that 
recollection and tried to excuse herself, as if there had been something to be as
hamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.  Like all men who have grown up in 
society, Prince Andrew liked meeting someone there not of the conventional societ
y stamp. And such was Natasha, with her surprise, her delight, her shyness, and e
ven her mistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with special care and te
nderness, sitting beside her and talking of the simplest and most unimportant mat
ters he admired her shy grace. In the middle of the cotillion, having completed o
ne of the figures, Natasha, still out of breath, was returning to her seat when a
nother dancer chose her. She was tired and panting and evidently thought of decli
ning, but immediately put her hand gaily on the man's shoulder, smiling at Prince
 Andrew.  "I'd be glad to sit beside you and rest I'm tired but you see how they 
keep asking me, and I'm glad of it, I'm happy and I love everybody, and you and I
 understand it all," and much, much more was said in her smile. When her partner 
left her Natasha ran across the room to choose two ladies for the figure.  "If sh
e goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will be my wife," said P
rince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as he watched her. She did go 
first to her cousin.  "What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thought Prince 
Andrew, "but what is certain is that that girl is so charming, so original, that 
she won't be dancing here a month before she will be married.... Such as she are 
rare here," he thought, as Natasha, readjusting a rose that was slipping on her b
odice, settled herself beside him.  When the cotillion was over the old count in 
his blue coat came up to the dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see th
em, and asked his daughter whether she was enjoying herself. Natasha did not answ
er at once but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully "How can you a
sk such a question?"  "I have never enjoyed myself so much before!" she said, and
 Prince Andrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace her father
 and instantly dropped again. Natasha was happier than she had ever been in her l
ife. She was at that height of bliss when one becomes completely kind and good an
d does not believe in the possibility of evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.  At that b
all Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the position his wife occupied i
n court circles. He was gloomy and absentminded. A deep furrow ran across his for
ehead, and standing by a window he stared over his spectacles seeing no one.  On 
her way to supper Natasha passed him.  Pierre's gloomy, unhappy look struck her. 
She stopped in front of him. She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superab
undance of her own happiness.  "How delightful it is, Count!" said she. "Isn't it
?"  Pierre smiled absentmindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.  "Yes, I 
am very glad," he said.  "How can people be dissatisfied with anything?" thought 
Natasha. "Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes all th
e people at the ball alike were good, kind, and splendid people, loving one anoth
er none of them capable of injuring anotherand so they ought all to be happy.    
  CHAPTER XVIII   Next day Prince Andrew thought of the ball, but his mind did no
t dwell on it long. "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then... "Yes, that l
ittle Rostova is very charming. There's something fresh, original, unPetersburgli
ke about her that distinguishes her." That was all he thought about yesterday's b
all, and after his morning tea he set to work.  But either from fatigue or want o
f sleep he was illdisposed for work and could get nothing done. He kept criticizi
ng his own work, as he often did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.  The
 visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequented all the societi
es in Petersburg, and a passionate devotee of the new ideas and of Speranski, and
 a diligent Petersburg newsmongerone of those men who choose their opinions like 
their clothes according to the fashion, but who for that very reason appear to be
 the warmest partisans. Hardly had he got rid of his hat before he ran into Princ
e Andrew's room with a preoccupied air and at once began talking. He had just hea
rd particulars of that morning's sitting of the Council of State opened by the Em
peror, and he spoke of it enthusiastically. The Emperor's speech had been extraor
dinary. It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchs deliver. "The S
overeign plainly said that the Council and Senate are estates of the realm, he sa
id that the government must rest not on authority but on secure bases. The Empero
r said that the fiscal system must be reorganized and the accounts published," re
counted Bitski, emphasizing certain words and opening his eyes significantly.  "A
h, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in our history," he conc
luded.  Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council of St
ate, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attached such import
ance, and was surprised that this event, now that it had taken place, did not aff
ect him, and even seemed quite insignificant. He listened with quiet irony to Bit
ski's enthusiastic account of it. A very simple thought occurred to him "What doe
s it matter to me or to Bitski what the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council
? Can all that make me any happier or better?"  And this simple reflection sudden
ly destroyed all the interest Prince Andrew had felt in the impending reforms. He
 was going to dine that evening at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as the
 host had said when inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in the intimate hom
e circle of the man he so admired had greatly interested Prince Andrew, especiall
y as he had not yet seen Speranski in his domestic surroundings, but now he felt 
disinclined to go to it.  At the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest h
ouse Speranski owned in the Taurida Gardens. In the parqueted dining room this sm
all house, remarkable for its extreme cleanliness suggesting that of a monastery,
 Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found the friendly gathering of Speranski's 
intimate acquaintances already assembled at five o'clock. There were no ladies pr
esent except Speranski's little daughter longfaced like her father and her govern
ess. The other guests were Gervais, Magnitski, and Stolypin. While still in the a
nteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato laugha laugh such 
as one hears on the stage. Someoneit sounded like Speranskiwas distinctly ejacula
ting hahaha. Prince Andrew had never before heard Speranski's famous laugh, and t
his ringing, high pitched laughter from a statesman made a strange impression on 
him.  He entered the dining room. The whole company were standing between two win
dows at a small table laid with horsd'oeuvres. Speranski, wearing a gray swallowt
ail coat with a star on the breast, and evidently still the same waistcoat and hi
gh white stock he had worn at the meeting of the Council of State, stood at the t
able with a beaming countenance. His guests surrounded him. Magnitski, addressing
 himself to Speranski, was relating an anecdote, and Speranski was laughing in ad
vance at what Magnitski was going to say. When Prince Andrew entered the room Mag
nitski's words were again crowned by laughter. Stolypin gave a deep bass guffaw a
s he munched a piece of bread and cheese. Gervais laughed softly with a hissing c
huckle, and Speranski in a highpitched staccato manner.  Still laughing, Speransk
i held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew.  "Very pleased to see you, Princ
e," he said. "One moment..." he went on, turning to Magnitski and interrupting hi
s story. "We have agreed that this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word ab
out business!" and turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.  Princ
e Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment, regret, and disillus
ionment. It seemed to him that this was not Speranski but someone else. Everythin
g that had formerly appeared mysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly bec
ame plain and unattractive.  At dinner the conversation did not cease for a momen
t and seemed to consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes. Before Magn
itski had finished his story someone else was anxious to relate something still f
unnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relating to the state service, related to p
eople in the service. It seemed that in this company the insignificance of those 
people was so definitely accepted that the only possible attitude toward them was
 one of good humored ridicule. Speranski related how at the Council that morning 
a deaf dignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought so too. Gervais
 gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable for the stupidity of eve
rybody concerned. Stolypin, stuttering, broke into the conversation and began exc
itedly talking of the abuses that existed under the former order of thingsthreate
ning to give a serious turn to the conversation. Magnitski starting quizzing Stol
ypin about his vehemence. Gervais intervened with a joke, and the talk reverted t
o its former lively tone.  Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and
 find amusement in a circle of friends, and his guests, understanding his wish, t
ried to enliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaiety seemed to Prince Andre
w mirthless and tiresome. Speranski's highpitched voice struck him unpleasantly, 
and the incessant laughter grated on him like a false note. Prince Andrew did not
 laugh and feared that he would be a damper on the spirits of the company, but no
 one took any notice of his being out of harmony with the general mood. They all 
seemed very gay.  He tried several times to join in the conversation, but his rem
arks were tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water, and he coul
d not jest with them.  There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it 
was witty and might have been funny, but it lacked just that something which is t
he salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a thing existed.  After 
dinner Speranski's daughter and her governess rose. He patted the little girl wit
h his white hand and kissed her. And that gesture, too, seemed unnatural to Princ
e Andrew.  The men remained at table over their portEnglish fashion. In the midst
 of a conversation that was started about Napoleon's Spanish affairs, which they 
all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to express a contrary opinion. Spera
nski smiled and, with an evident wish to prevent the conversation from taking an 
unpleasant course, told a story that had no connection with the previous conversa
tion. For a few moments all were silent.  Having sat some time at table, Speransk
i corked a bottle of wine and, remarking, "Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage
 and pair," passed it to the servant and got up. All rose and continuing to talk 
loudly went into the drawing room. Two letters brought by a courier were handed t
o Speranski and he took them to his study. As soon as he had left the room the ge
neral merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensibly and quietly wit
h one another.  "Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returning from his st
udy. "A wonderful talent!" he said to Prince Andrew, and Magnitski immediately as
sumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses in French which he had compo
sed about various wellknown Petersburg people. He was interrupted several times b
y applause. When the verses were finished Prince Andrew went up to Speranski and 
took his leave.  "Where are you off to so early?" asked Speranski.  "I promised t
o go to a reception."  They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those
 mirrorlike, impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to ha
ve expected anything from Speranski and from any of his own activities connected 
with him, or ever to have attributed importance to what Speranski was doing. That
 precise, mirthless laughter rang in Prince Andrew's ears long after he had left 
the house.  When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life in Pete
rsburg during those last four months as if it were something new. He recalled his
 exertions and solicitations, and the history of his project of army reform, whic
h had been accepted for consideration and which they were trying to pass over in 
silence simply because another, a very poor one, had already been prepared and su
bmitted to the Emperor. He thought of the meetings of a committee of which Berg w
as a member. He remembered how carefully and at what length everything relating t
o form and procedure was discussed at those meetings, and how sedulously and prom
ptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded. He recalled his lab
ors on the Legal Code, and how painstakingly he had translated the articles of th
e Roman and French codes into Russian, and he felt ashamed of himself. Then he vi
vidly pictured to himself Bogucharovo, his occupations in the country, his journe
y to Ryazan he remembered the peasants and Dron the village elder, and mentally a
pplying to them the Personal Rights he had divided into paragraphs, he felt aston
ished that he could have spent so much time on such useless work.      CHAPTER XI
X   Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before, and 
among them at the Rostovs' with whom he had renewed acquaintance at the ball. Apa
rt from considerations of politeness which demanded the call, he wanted to see th
at original, eager girl who had left such a pleasant impression on his mind, in h
er own home.  Natasha was one of the first to meet him. She was wearing a darkblu
e house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in her ball d
ress. She and all the Rostov family welcomed him as an old friend, simply and cor
dially. The whole family, whom he had formerly judged severely, now seemed to him
 to consist of excellent, simple, and kindly people. The old count's hospitality 
and good nature, which struck one especially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise
, were such that Prince Andrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. "Yes," he thou
ght, "they are capital people, who of course have not the slightest idea what a t
reasure they possess in Natasha but they are kindly folk and form the best possib
le setting for this strikingly poetic, charming girl, overflowing with life!"  In
 Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completely alien to him a
nd brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world, that in the Otradnoe avenue
 and at the window that moonlight night had already begun to disconcert him. Now 
this world disconcerted him no longer and was no longer alien to him, but he hims
elf having entered it found in it a new enjoyment.  After dinner Natasha, at Prin
ce Andrew's request, went to the clavichord and began singing. Prince Andrew stoo
d by a window talking to the ladies and listened to her. In the midst of a phrase
 he ceased speaking and suddenly felt tears choking him, a thing he had thought i
mpossible for him. He looked at Natasha as she sang, and something new and joyful
 stirred in his soul. He felt happy and at the same time sad. He had absolutely n
othing to weep about yet he was ready to weep. What about? His former love? The l
ittle princess? His disillusionments?... His hopes for the future?... Yes and no.
 The chief reason was a sudden, vivid sense of the terrible contrast between some
thing infinitely great and illimitable within him and that limited and material s
omething that he, and even she, was. This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him
 while she sang.  As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked ho
w he liked her voice. She asked this and then became confused, feeling that she o
ught not to have asked it. He smiled, looking at her, and said he liked her singi
ng as he liked everything she did.  Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the e
vening. He went to bed from habit, but soon realized that he could not sleep. Hav
ing lit his candle he sat up in bed, then got up, then lay down again not at all 
troubled by his sleeplessness his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he had stepp
ed out of a stuffy room into God's own fresh air. It did not enter his head that 
he was in love with Natasha he was not thinking about her, but only picturing her
 to himself, and in consequence all life appeared in a new light. "Why do I striv
e, why do I toil in this narrow, confined frame, when life, all life with all its
 joys, is open to me?" said he to himself. And for the first time for a very long
 while he began making happy plans for the future. He decided that he must attend
 to his son's education by finding a tutor and putting the boy in his charge, the
n he ought to retire from the service and go abroad, and see England, Switzerland
 and Italy. "I must use my freedom while I feel so much strength and youth in me,
" he said to himself. "Pierre was right when he said one must believe in the poss
ibility of happiness in order to be happy, and now I do believe in it. Let the de
ad bury their dead, but while one has life one must live and be happy!" thought h
e.      CHAPTER XX   One morning Colonel Berg, whom Pierre knew as he knew everyb
ody in Moscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an immaculate bran
dnew uniform, with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over his temples as the E
mperor Alexander wore his hair.  "I have just been to see the countess, your wife
. Unfortunately she could not grant my request, but I hope, Count, I shall be mor
e fortunate with you," he said with a smile.  "What is it you wish, Colonel? I am
 at your service."  "I have now quite settled in my new rooms, Count" Berg said t
his with perfect conviction that this information could not but be agreeable, "an
d so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own and my wife's friends." He s
miled still more pleasantly. "I wished to ask the countess and you to do me the h
onor of coming to tea and to supper."  Only Countess Helene, considering the soci
ety of such people as the Bergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such
 an invitation. Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a
 small but select company, and why this would give him pleasure, and why though h
e grudged spending money on cards or anything harmful, he was prepared to run int
o some expense for the sake of good societythat Pierre could not refuse, and prom
ised to come.  "But don't be late, Count, if I may venture to ask about ten minut
es to eight, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our general is coming. He is very
 good to me. We shall have supper, Count. So you will do me the favor."  Contrary
 to his habit of being late, Pierre on that day arrived at the Bergs' house, not 
at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight.  Having prepared everything necessary for
 the party, the Bergs were ready for their guests' arrival.  In their new, clean,
 and light study with its small busts and pictures and new furniture sat Berg and
 his wife. Berg, closely buttoned up in his new uniform, sat beside his wife expl
aining to her that one always could and should be acquainted with people above on
e, because only then does one get satisfaction from acquaintances.  "You can get 
to know something, you can ask for something. See how I managed from my first pro
motion." Berg measured his life not by years but by promotions. "My comrades are 
still nobodies, while I am only waiting for a vacancy to command a regiment, and 
have the happiness to be your husband." He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on th
e way to her straightened out a turnedup corner of the carpet. "And how have I ob
tained all this? Chiefly by knowing how to choose my aquaintances. It goes withou
t saying that one must be conscientious and methodical."  Berg smiled with a sens
e of his superiority over a weak woman, and paused, reflecting that this dear wif
e of his was after all but a weak woman who could not understand all that constit
utes a man's dignity, what it was ein Mann zu sein. * Vera at the same time smili
ng with a sense of superiority over her good, conscientious husband, who all the 
same understood life wrongly, as according to Vera all men did. Berg, judging by 
his wife, thought all women weak and foolish. Vera, judging only by her husband a
nd generalizing from that observation, supposed that all men, though they underst
and nothing and are conceited and selfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alo
ne.       * To be a man.   Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not t
o crush her lace fichu for which he had paid a good price, kissing her straight o
n the lips.  "The only thing is, we mustn't have children too soon," he continued
, following an unconscious sequence of ideas.  "Yes," answered Vera, "I don't at 
all want that. We must live for society."  "Princess Yusupova wore one exactly li
ke this," said Berg, pointing to the fichu with a happy and kindly smile.  Just t
hen Count Bezukhov was announced. Husband and wife glanced at one another, both s
miling with selfsatisfaction, and each mentally claiming the honor of this visit.
  "This is what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances," thought Berg. "This 
is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself."  "But please don't interrupt me
 when I am entertaining the guests," said Vera, "because I know what interests ea
ch of them and what to say to different people."  Berg smiled again.  "It can't b
e helped men must sometimes have masculine conversation," said he.  They received
 Pierre in their small, new drawingroom, where it was impossible to sit down anyw
here without disturbing its symmetry, neatness, and order so it was quite compreh
ensible and not strange that Berg, having generously offered to disturb the symme
try of an armchair or of the sofa for his dear guest, but being apparently painfu
lly undecided on the matter himself, eventually left the visitor to settle the qu
estion of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving a chair for himself,
 and Berg and Vera immediately began their evening party, interrupting each other
 in their efforts to entertain their guest.  Vera, having decided in her own mind
 that Pierre ought to be entertained with conversation about the French embassy, 
at once began accordingly. Berg, having decided that masculine conversation was r
equired, interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on the question of the war wi
th Austria, and unconsciously jumped from the general subject to personal conside
rations as to the proposals made him to take part in the Austrian campaign and th
e reasons why he had declined them. Though the conversation was very incoherent a
nd Vera was angry at the intrusion of the masculine element, both husband and wif
e felt with satisfaction that, even if only one guest was present, their evening 
had begun very well and was as like as two peas to every other evening party with
 its talk, tea, and lighted candles.  Before long Boris, Berg's old comrade, arri
ved. There was a shade of condescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg an
d Vera. After Boris came a lady with the colonel, then the general himself, then 
the Rostovs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all other evening p
arties. Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles of satisfaction at the sight
 of all this movement in their drawing room, at the sound of the disconnected tal
k, the rustling of dresses, and the bowing and scraping. Everything was just as e
verybody always has it, especially so the general, who admired the apartment, pat
ted Berg on the shoulder, and with parental authority superintended the setting o
ut of the table for boston. The general sat down by Count Ilya Rostov, who was ne
xt to himself the most important guest. The old people sat with the old, the youn
g with the young, and the hostess at the tea table, on which stood exactly the sa
me kind of cakes in a silver cake basket as the Panins had at their party. Everyt
hing was just as it was everywhere else.      CHAPTER XXI   Pierre, as one of the
 principal guests, had to sit down to boston with Count Rostov, the general, and 
the colonel. At the card table he happened to be directly facing Natasha, and was
 struck by a curious change that had come over her since the ball. She was silent
, and not only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from plainness by 
her look of gentle indifference to everything around.  "What's the matter with he
r?" thought Pierre, glancing at her. She was sitting by her sister at the tea tab
le, and reluctantly, without looking at him, made some reply to Boris who sat dow
n beside her. After playing out a whole suit and to his partner's delight taking 
five tricks, Pierre, hearing greetings and the steps of someone who had entered t
he room while he was picking up his tricks, glanced again at Natasha.  "What has 
happened to her?" he asked himself with still greater surprise.  Prince Andrew wa
s standing before her, saying something to her with a look of tender solicitude. 
She, having raised her head, was looking up at him, flushed and evidently trying 
to master her rapid breathing. And the bright glow of some inner fire that had be
en suppressed was again alight in her. She was completely transformed and from a 
plain girl had again become what she had been at the ball.  Prince Andrew went up
 to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new and youthful expression in his friend's 
face.  Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting now with his 
back to Natasha and now facing her, but during the whole of the six rubbers he wa
tched her and his friend.  "Something very important is happening between them," 
thought Pierre, and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and m
ade him neglect the game.  After six rubbers the general got up, saying that it w
as no use playing like that, and Pierre was released. Natasha on one side was tal
king with Sonya and Boris, and Vera with a subtle smile was saying something to P
rince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, asking whether they were talking 
secrets, sat down beside them. Vera, having noticed Prince Andrew's attentions to
 Natasha, decided that at a party, a real evening party, subtle allusions to the 
tender passion were absolutely necessary and, seizing a moment when Prince Andrew
 was alone, began a conversation with him about feelings in general and about her
 sister. With so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be, she 
felt that she had to employ her diplomatic tact.  When Pierre went up to them he 
noticed that Vera was being carried away by her selfsatisfied talk, but that Prin
ce Andrew seemed embarrassed, a thing that rarely happened with him.  "What do yo
u think?" Vera was saying with an arch smile. "You are so discerning, Prince, and
 understand people's characters so well at a glance. What do you think of Natalie
? Could she be constant in her attachments? Could she, like other women" Vera mea
nt herself, "love a man once for all and remain true to him forever? That is what
 I consider true love. What do you think, Prince?"  "I know your sister too littl
e," replied Prince Andrew, with a sarcastic smile under which he wished to hide h
is embarrassment, "to be able to solve so delicate a question, and then I have no
ticed that the less attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be,"
 he added, and looked up at Pierre who was just approaching them.  "Yes, that is 
true, Prince. In our days," continued Veramentioning "our days" as people of limi
ted intelligence are fond of doing, imagining that they have discovered and appra
ised the peculiarities of "our days" and that human characteristics change with t
he times"in our days a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courte
d often stifles real feeling in her. And it must be confessed that Natalie is ver
y susceptible." This return to the subject of Natalie caused Prince Andrew to kni
t his brows with discomfort he was about to rise, but Vera continued with a still
 more subtle smile  "I think no one has been more courted than she," she went on,
 "but till quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone. Now you know, Count
," she said to Pierre, "even our dear cousin Boris, who, between ourselves, was v
ery far gone in the land of tenderness..." alluding to a map of love much in vogu
e at that time.  Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.  "You are friendly wi
th Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera.  "Yes, I know him..."  "I expect he has told y
ou of his childish love for Natasha?"  "Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly as
ked Prince Andrew, blushing unexpectedly.  "Yes, you know between cousins intimac
y often leads to love. Le cousinage est un dangereux voisinage. * Don't you think
 so?"       * "Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood."   "Oh, undoubtedly!" said
 Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnatural liveliness he began chaffing Pierre
 about the need to be very careful with his fiftyyearold Moscow cousins, and in t
he midst of these jesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him
 aside.  "Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's strange animation with surpris
e, and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose.  "I must... I must ha
ve a talk with you," said Prince Andrew. "You know that pair of women's gloves?" 
He referred to the Masonic gloves given to a newly initiated Brother to present t
o the woman he loved. "I... but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a stra
nge light in his eyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrew approached
 Natasha and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked her somethin
g and how she flushed as she replied.  But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and
 began insisting that he should take part in an argument between the general and 
the colonel on the affairs in Spain.  Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of 
pleasure never left his face. The party was very successful and quite like other 
parties he had seen. Everything was similar the ladies' subtle talk, the cards, t
he general raising his voice at the card table, and the samovar and the tea cakes
 only one thing was lacking that he had always seen at the evening parties he wis
hed to imitate. They had not yet had a loud conversation among the men and a disp
ute about something important and clever. Now the general had begun such a discus
sion and so Berg drew Pierre to it.      CHAPTER XXII   Next day, having been inv
ited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with the Rostovs and spent the rest of the
 day there.  Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, an
d without concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day. Not only in the soul
 of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Natasha, but in the whole house, ther
e was a feeling of awe at something important that was bound to happen. The count
ess looked with sad and sternly serious eyes at Prince Andrew when he talked to N
atasha and timidly started some artificial conversation about trifles as soon as 
he looked her way. Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraid of being in the w
ay when she was with them. Natasha grew pale, in a panic of expectation, when she
 remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her by his timidit
y. She felt that he wanted to say something to her but could not bring himself to
 do so.  In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up to Nat
asha and whispered "Well, what?"  "Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anything
 now! One can't talk about that," said Natasha.  But all the same that night Nata
sha, now agitated and now frightened, lay a long time in her mother's bed gazing 
straight before her. She told her how he had complimented her, how he told her he
 was going abroad, asked her where they were going to spend the summer, and then 
how he had asked her about Boris.  "But such a... such a... never happened to me 
before!" she said. "Only I feel afraid in his presence. I am always afraid when I
'm with him. What does that mean? Does it mean that it's the real thing? Yes? Mam
ma, are you asleep?"  "No, my love I am frightened myself," answered her mother. 
"Now go!"  "All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy! Mummy! 
such a thing never happened to me before," she said, surprised and alarmed at the
 feeling she was aware of in herself. "And could we ever have thought!..."  It se
emed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrew at Otradnoe she
 had fallen in love with him. It was as if she feared this strange, unexpected ha
ppiness of meeting again the very man she had then chosen she was firmly convince
d she had done so and of finding him, as it seemed, not indifferent to her.  "And
 it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg while we are here. 
And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball. It is fate. Clearly it is 
fate that everything led up to this! Already then, directly I saw him I felt some
thing peculiar."  "What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them.
.." said her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince Andrew had wri
tten in Natasha's album.  "Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?
"  "Don't, Natasha! Pray to God. 'Marriages are made in heaven,'" said her mother
.  "Darling Mummy, how I love you! How happy I am!" cried Natasha, shedding tears
 of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.  At that very time Prince Andrew
 was sitting with Pierre and telling him of his love for Natasha and his firm res
olve to make her his wife.  That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house
. The French ambassador was there, and a foreign prince of the blood who had of l
ate become a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladies and gentlemen. P
ierre, who had come downstairs, walked through the rooms and struck everyone by h
is preoccupied, absentminded, and morose air.  Since the ball he had felt the app
roach of a fit of nervous depression and had made desperate efforts to combat it.
 Since the intimacy of his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly be
en made a gentleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he had begun to feel op
pressed and ashamed in court society, and dark thoughts of the vanity of all thin
gs human came to him oftener than before. At the same time the feeling he had not
iced between his protegee Natasha and Prince Andrew accentuated his gloom by the 
contrast between his own position and his friend's. He tried equally to avoid thi
nking about his wife, and about Natasha and Prince Andrew and again everything se
emed to him insignificant in comparison with eternity again the question for what
? presented itself and he forced himself to work day and night at Masonic labors,
 hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Toward midnight, after
 he had left the countess' apartments, he was sitting upstairs in a shabby dressi
ng gown, copying out the original transaction of the Scottish lodge of Freemasons
 at a table in his low room cloudy with tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It w
as Prince Andrew.  "Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied a
ir. "And I, you see, am hard at it." He pointed to his manuscript book with that 
air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look at their wor
k.  Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed life on his fac
e, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look, smiled at him with t
he egotism of joy.  "Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell you about it y
esterday and I have come to do so today. I never experienced anything like it bef
ore. I am in love, my friend!"  Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his
 heavy person down on the sofa beside Prince Andrew.  "With Natasha Rostova, yes?
" said he.  "Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should never have believed it, bu
t the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself and suffered, but 
I would not exchange even that torment for anything in the world, I have not live
d till now. At last I live, but I can't live without her! But can she love me?...
 I am too old for her.... Why don't you speak?"  "I? I? What did I tell you?" sai
d Pierre suddenly, rising and beginning to pace up and down the room. "I always t
hought it.... That girl is such a treasure... she is a rare girl.... My dear frie
nd, I entreat you, don't philosophize, don't doubt, marry, marry, marry.... And I
 am sure there will not be a happier man than you."  "But what of her?"  "She lov
es you."  "Don't talk rubbish..." said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking into Pi
erre's eyes.  "She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely.  "But do listen," return
ed Prince Andrew, holding him by the arm. "Do you know the condition I am in? I m
ust talk about it to someone."  "Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said Pierre
, and his face really changed, his brow became smooth, and he listened gladly to 
Prince Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite a n
ew man. Where was his spleen, his contempt for life, his disillusionment? Pierre 
was the only person to whom he made up his mind to speak openly and to him he tol
d all that was in his soul. Now he boldly and lightly made plans for an extended 
future, said he could not sacrifice his own happiness to his father's caprice, an
d spoke of how he would either make his father consent to this marriage and love 
her, or would do without his consent then he marveled at the feeling that had mas
tered him as at something strange, apart from and independent of himself.  "I sho
uld not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable of such love," said P
rince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feeling that I knew in the past. The who
le world is now for me divided into two halves one half is she, and there all is 
joy, hope, light the other half is everything where she is not, and there is all 
gloom and darkness...."  "Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre "yes, yes, I und
erstand that."  "I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am ver
y happy! You understand me? I know you are glad for my sake."  "Yes, yes," Pierre
 assented, looking at his friend with a touched and sad expression in his eyes. T
he brighter Prince Andrew's lot appeared to him, the gloomier seemed his own.    
  CHAPTER XXIII   Prince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriage, and 
to obtain this he started for the country next day.  His father received his son'
s communication with external composure, but inward wrath. He could not comprehen
d how anyone could wish to alter his life or introduce anything new into it, when
 his own life was already ending. "If only they would let me end my days as I wan
t to," thought the old man, "then they might do as they please." With his son, ho
wever, he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and, adoptin
g a quiet tone, discussed the whole matter.  In the first place the marriage was 
not a brilliant one as regards birth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew wa
s no longer as young as he had been and his health was poor the old man laid spec
ial stress on this, while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son whom it would
 be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl. "Fourthly and finally," the father sai
d, looking ironically at his son, "I beg you to put it off for a year go abroad, 
take a cure, look out as you wanted to for a German tutor for Prince Nicholas. Th
en if your love or passion or obstinacyas you pleaseis still as great, marry! And
 that's my last word on it. Mind, the last..." concluded the prince, in a tone wh
ich showed that nothing would make him alter his decision.  Prince Andrew saw cle
arly that the old man hoped that his feelings, or his fiancee's, would not stand 
a year's test, or that he the old prince himself would die before then, and he de
cided to conform to his father's wishto propose, and postpone the wedding for a y
ear.  Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs, Prince An
drew returned to Petersburg.   Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha ex
pected Bolkonski all day, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was
 the same. Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowing that Prince Andrew
 had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.  Three wee
ks passed in this way. Natasha had no desire to go out anywhere and wandered from
 room to room like a shadow, idle and listless she wept secretly at night and did
 not go to her mother in the evenings. She blushed continually and was irritable.
 It seemed to her that everybody knew about her disappointment and was laughing a
t her and pitying her. Strong as was her inward grief, this wound to her vanity i
ntensified her misery.  Once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and 
suddenly began to cry. Her tears were those of an offended child who does not kno
w why it is being punished.  The countess began to soothe Natasha, who after firs
t listening to her mother's words, suddenly interrupted her  "Leave off, Mamma! I
 don't think, and don't want to think about it! He just came and then left off, l
eft off..."  Her voice trembled, and she again nearly cried, but recovered and we
nt on quietly  "And I don't at all want to get married. And I am afraid of him I 
have now become quite calm, quite calm."  The day after this conversation Natasha
 put on the old dress which she knew had the peculiar property of conducing to ch
eerfulness in the mornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life whic
h she had abandoned since the ball. Having finished her morning tea she went to t
he ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, and began singi
ng her solfeggio. When she had finished her first exercise she stood still in the
 middle of the room and sang a musical phrase that particularly pleased her. She 
listened joyfully as though she had not expected it to the charm of the notes rev
erberating, filling the whole empty ballroom, and slowly dying away and all at on
ce she felt cheerful. "What's the good of making so much of it? Things are nice a
s it is," she said to herself, and she began walking up and down the room, not st
epping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with each step from the heel
 to the toe she had on a new and favorite pair of shoes and listening to the regu
lar tap of the heel and creak of the toe as gladly as she had to the sounds of he
r own voice. Passing a mirror she glanced into it. "There, that's me!" the expres
sion of her face seemed to say as she caught sight of herself. "Well, and very ni
ce too! I need nobody."  A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in t
he room but she would not let him, and having closed the door behind him continue
d her walk. That morning she had returned to her favorite moodlove of, and deligh
t in, herself. "How charming that Natasha is!" she said again, speaking as some t
hird, collective, male person. "Pretty, a good voice, young, and in nobody's way 
if only they leave her in peace." But however much they left her in peace she cou
ld not now be at peace, and immediately felt this.  In the hall the porch door op
ened, and someone asked, "At home?" and then footsteps were heard. Natasha was lo
oking at the mirror, but did not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the h
all. When she saw herself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this for certai
n, though she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.  Pale and agitated
, Natasha ran into the drawing room.  "Mamma! Bolkonski has come!" she said. "Mam
ma, it is awful, it is unbearable! I don't want... to be tormented? What am I to 
do?..."  Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the room with an
 agitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natasha his face brightened. He kis
sed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and sat down beside the sofa.  "It is long 
since we had the pleasure..." began the countess, but Prince Andrew interrupted h
er by answering her intended question, obviously in haste to say what he had to. 
 "I have not been to see you all this time because I have been at my father's. I 
had to talk over a very important matter with him. I only got back last night," h
e said glancing at Natasha "I want to have a talk with you, Countess," he added a
fter a moment's pause.  The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply.  "I am at 
your disposal," she murmured.  Natasha knew that she ought to go away, but was un
able to do so something gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she stared 
straight at Prince Andrew with wideopen eyes.  "At once? This instant!... No, it 
can't be!" she thought.  Again he glanced at her, and that glance convinced her t
hat she was not mistaken. Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would be deci
ded.  "Go, Natasha! I will call you," said the countess in a whisper.  Natasha gl
anced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and at her mother and went 
out.  "I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter's hand," said Prince Andre
w.  The countess' face flushed hotly, but she said nothing.  "Your offer..." she 
began at last sedately. He remained silent, looking into her eyes. "Your offer...
" she grew confused "is agreeable to us, and I accept your offer. I am glad. And 
my husband... I hope... but it will depend on her...."  "I will speak to her when
 I have your consent.... Do you give it to me?" said Prince Andrew.  "Yes," repli
ed the countess. She held out her hand to him, and with a mixed feeling of estran
gement and tenderness pressed her lips to his forehead as he stooped to kiss her 
hand. She wished to love him as a son, but felt that to her he was a stranger and
 a terrifying man. "I am sure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but y
our father..."  "My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an express 
condition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for a year. And I 
wished to tell you of that," said Prince Andrew.  "It is true that Natasha is sti
ll young, butso long as that?..."  "It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with a
 sigh.  "I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room.  "Lord ha
ve mercy upon us!" she repeated while seeking her daughter.  Sonya said that Nata
sha was in her bedroom. Natasha was sitting on the bed, pale and dry eyed, and wa
s gazing at the icons and whispering something as she rapidly crossed herself. Se
eing her mother she jumped up and flew to her.  "Well, Mamma?... Well?..."  "Go, 
go to him. He is asking for your hand," said the countess, coldly it seemed to Na
tasha. "Go... go," said the mother, sadly and reproachfully, with a deep sigh, as
 her daughter ran away.  Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing roo
m. When she came in and saw him she paused. "Is it possible that this stranger ha
s now become everything to me?" she asked herself, and immediately answered, "Yes
, everything! He alone is now dearer to me than everything in the world." Prince 
Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes.  "I have loved you from the very first 
moment I saw you. May I hope?"  He looked at her and was struck by the serious im
passioned expression of her face. Her face said "Why ask? Why doubt what you cann
ot but know? Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"  She drew near
 to him and stopped. He took her hand and kissed it.  "Do you love me?"  "Yes, ye
s!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sighed loudly and, catching her 
breath more and more quickly, began to sob.  "What is it? What's the matter?"  "O
h, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled through her tears, bent over closer to him
, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether she might, and then kissed h
im.  Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not find in his 
heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenly changed there was no
 longer the former poetic and mystic charm of desire, but there was pity for her 
feminine and childish weakness, fear at her devotion and trustfulness, and an opp
ressive yet joyful sense of the duty that now bound him to her forever. The prese
nt feeling, though not so bright and poetic as the former, was stronger and more 
serious.  "Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?" asked Prince A
ndrew, still looking into her eyes.  "Is it possible that Ithe 'chit of a girl,' 
as everybody called me," thought Natasha"is it possible that I am now to be the w
ife and the equal of this strange, dear, clever man whom even my father looks up 
to? Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be no more playing with life, t
hat now I am grown up, that on me now lies a responsibility for my every word and
 deed? Yes, but what did he ask me?"  "No," she replied, but she had not understo
od his question.  "Forgive me!" he said. "But you are so young, and I have alread
y been through so much in life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet know yourself
."  Natasha listened with concentrated attention, trying but failing to take in t
he meaning of his words.  "Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be," 
continued Prince Andrew, "it will give you time to be sure of yourself. I ask you
 to make me happy in a year, but you are free our engagement shall remain a secre
t, and should you find that you do not love me, or should you come to love..." sa
id Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile.  "Why do you say that?" Natasha interru
pted him. "You know that from the very day you first came to Otradnoe I have love
d you," she cried, quite convinced that she spoke the truth.  "In a year you will
 learn to know yourself...."  "A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, only now
 realizing that the marriage was to be postponed for a year. "But why a year? Why
 a year?..."  Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay. N
atasha did not hear him.  "And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince Andrew did 
not reply, but his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision.  "
It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natasha suddenly cried, and again burst into 
sobs. "I shall die, waiting a year it's impossible, it's awful!" She looked into 
her lover's face and saw in it a look of commiseration and perplexity.  "No, no! 
I'll do anything!" she said, suddenly checking her tears. "I am so happy."  The f
ather and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed couple their blessing.
  From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs' as Natasha's affianc
ed lover.      CHAPTER XXIV   No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's enga
gement to Bolkonski was not announced Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said tha
t as he was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole burden of it tha
t he had given his word and bound himself forever, but that he did not wish to bi
nd Natasha and gave her perfect freedom. If after six months she felt that she di
d not love him she would have full right to reject him. Naturally neither Natasha
 nor her parents wished to hear of this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came ever
y day to the Rostovs', but did not behave to Natasha as an affianced lover he did
 not use the familiar thou, but said you to her, and kissed only her hand. After 
their engagement, quite different, intimate, and natural relations sprang up betw
een them. It was as if they had not known each other till now. Both liked to reca
ll how they had regarded each other when as yet they were nothing to one another 
they felt themselves now quite different beings then they were artificial, now na
tural and sincere. At first the family felt some constraint in intercourse with P
rince Andrew he seemed a man from another world, and for a long time Natasha trai
ned the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them all that he only appeare
d to be different, but was really just like all of them, and that she was not afr
aid of him and no one else ought to be. After a few days they grew accustomed to 
him, and without restraint in his presence pursued their usual way of life, in wh
ich he took his part. He could talk about rural economy with the count, fashions 
with the countess and Natasha, and about albums and fancywork with Sonya. Sometim
es the household both among themselves and in his presence expressed their wonder
 at how it had all happened, and at the evident omens there had been of it Prince
 Andrew's coming to Otradnoe and their coming to Petersburg, and the likeness bet
ween Natasha and Prince Andrew which her nurse had noticed on his first visit, an
d Andrew's encounter with Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokening t
hat it had to be.  In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which alwa
ys accompanies the presence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sitting togethe
r everyone kept silent. Sometimes the others would get up and go away and the cou
ple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarely spoke of their future life. P
rince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to speak of it. Natasha shared this as she di
d all his feelings, which she constantly divined. Once she began questioning him 
about his son. Prince Andrew blushed, as he often did nowNatasha particularly lik
ed it in himand said that his son would not live with them.  "Why not?" asked Nat
asha in a frightened tone.  "I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and bes
ides..."  "How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately guessing his t
hought "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding fault with us."  Som
etimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask his advice about 
Petya's education or Nicholas' service. The old countess sighed as she looked at 
them Sonya was always getting frightened lest she should be in the way and tried 
to find excuses for leaving them alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prin
ce Andrew spoke he could tell a story very well, Natasha listened to him with pri
de when she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed attentively and scr
utinizingly at her. She asked herself in perplexity "What does he look for in me?
 He is trying to discover something by looking at me! What if what he seeks in me
 is not there?" Sometimes she fell into one of the mad, merry moods characteristi
c of her, and then she particularly loved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laugh
ed. He seldom laughed, but when he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laugh
ter, and after such a laugh she always felt nearer to him. Natasha would have bee
n completely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her and drawing near
 had not terrified her, just as the mere thought of it made him turn pale and col
d.  On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought with him Pi
erre, who had not been to the Rostovs' once since the ball. Pierre seemed disconc
erted and embarrassed. He was talking to the countess, and Natasha sat down besid
e a little chess table with Sonya, thereby inviting Prince Andrew to come too. He
 did so.  "You have known Bezukhov a long time?" he asked. "Do you like him?"  "Y
es, he's a dear, but very absurd."  And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she beg
an to tell anecdotes of his absentmindedness, some of which had even been invente
d about him.  "Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have known him
 from childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie," Prince Andrew said 
with sudden seriousness"I am going away and heaven knows what may happen. You may
 cease to... all right, I know I am not to say that. Only this, then whatever may
 happen to you when I am not here..."  "What can happen?"  "Whatever trouble may 
come," Prince Andrew continued, "I beg you, Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may hap
pen, to turn to him alone for advice and help! He is a most absentminded and absu
rd fellow, but he has a heart of gold."  Neither her father, nor her mother, nor 
Sonya, nor Prince Andrew himself could have foreseen how the separation from her 
lover would act on Natasha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all tha
t day, dryeyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if not understanding what a
waited her. She did not even cry when, on taking leave, he kissed her hand for th
e last time. "Don't go!" she said in a tone that made him wonder whether he reall
y ought not to stay and which he remembered long afterwards. Nor did she cry when
 he was gone but for several days she sat in her room dryeyed, taking no interest
 in anything and only saying now and then, "Oh, why did he go away?"  But a fortn
ight after his departure, to the surprise of those around her, she recovered from
 her mental sickness just as suddenly and became her old self again, but with a c
hange in her moral physiognomy, as a child gets up after a long illness with a ch
anged expression of face.      CHAPTER XXV   During that year after his son's dep
arture, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's health and temper became much worse. He grew 
still more irritable, and it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of hi
s frequent fits of unprovoked anger. He seemed carefully to seek out her tender s
pots so as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible. Princess Mary had two 
passions and consequently two joysher nephew, little Nicholas, and religionand th
ese were the favorite subjects of the prince's attacks and ridicule. Whatever was
 spoken of he would bring round to the superstitiousness of old maids, or the pet
ting and spoiling of children. "You want to make him"little Nicholas"into an old 
maid like yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid," he wo
uld say. Or, turning to Mademoiselle Bourienne, he would ask her in Princess Mary
's presence how she liked our village priests and icons and would joke about them
.  He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings and tormented her, but it cost he
r no effort to forgive him. Could he be to blame toward her, or could her father,
 whom she knew loved her in spite of it all, be unjust? And what is justice? The 
princess never thought of that proud word "justice." All the complex laws of man 
centered for her in one clear and simple lawthe law of love and selfsacrifice tau
ght us by Him who lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God. What h
ad she to do with the justice or injustice of other people? She had to endure and
 love, and that she did.  During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills 
and had been gay, gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him 
for a long time past. She felt that something had happened to him, but he said no
thing to her about his love. Before he left he had a long talk with his father ab
out something, and Princess Mary noticed that before his departure they were diss
atisfied with one another.  Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrot
e to her friend Julie Karagina in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed as all girls d
ream of marrying to her brother, and who was at that time in mourning for her own
 brother, killed in Turkey.   Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tende
r friend Julie.  Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as
 a special providence of God who, loving you, wishes to try you and your excellen
t mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone, canI will not say comfort 
usbut save us from despair. Religion alone can explain to us what without its hel
p man cannot comprehend why, for what cause, kind and noble beings able to find h
appiness in lifenot merely harming no one but necessary to the happiness of other
sare called away to God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a 
burden to themselves and to others, are left living. The first death I saw, and o
ne I shall never forgetthat of my dear sisterinlawleft that impression on me. Jus
t as you ask destiny why your splendid brother had to die, so I asked why that an
gel Lise, who not only never wronged anyone, but in whose soul there were never a
ny unkind thoughts, had to die. And what do you think, dear friend? Five years ha
ve passed since then, and already I, with my petty understanding, begin to see cl
early why she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression of the
 infinite goodness of the Creator, whose every action, though generally incompreh
ensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite love for His creatures. Per
haps, I often think, she was too angelically innocent to have the strength to per
form all a mother's duties. As a young wife she was irreproachable perhaps she co
uld not have been so as a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particu
larly Prince Andrew, with the purest regrets and memories, but probably she will 
there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But not to speak of her alone, 
that early and terrible death has had the most beneficent influence on me and on 
my brother in spite of all our grief. Then, at the moment of our loss, these thou
ghts could not occur to me I should then have dismissed them with horror, but now
 they are very clear and certain. I write all this to you, dear friend, only to c
onvince you of the Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life not a
 single hair of our heads will fall without His will. And His will is governed on
ly by infinite love for us, and so whatever befalls us is for our good.  You ask 
whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow. In spite of my wish to see you, I d
o not think so and do not want to do so. You will be surprised to hear that the r
eason for this is Buonaparte! The case is this my father's health is growing noti
ceably worse, he cannot stand any contradiction and is becoming irritable. This i
rritability is, as you know, chiefly directed to political questions. He cannot e
ndure the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all the sover
eigns of Europe and particularly with our own, the grandson of the Great Catherin
e! As you know, I am quite indifferent to politics, but from my father's remarks 
and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know all that goes on in the world and esp
ecially about the honors conferred on Buonaparte, who only at Bald Hills in the w
hole world, it seems, is not accepted as a great man, still less as Emperor of Fr
ance. And my father cannot stand this. It seems to me that it is chiefly because 
of his political views that my father is reluctant to speak of going to Moscow fo
r he foresees the encounters that would result from his way of expressing his vie
ws regardless of anybody. All the benefit he might derive from a course of treatm
ent he would lose as a result of the disputes about Buonaparte which would be ine
vitable. In any case it will be decided very shortly.  Our family life goes on in
 the old way except for my brother Andrew's absence. He, as I wrote you before, h
as changed very much of late. After his sorrow he only this year quite recovered 
his spirits. He has again become as I used to know him when a child kind, affecti
onate, with that heart of gold to which I know no equal. He has realized, it seem
s to me, that life is not over for him. But together with this mental change he h
as grown physically much weaker. He has become thinner and more nervous. I am anx
ious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroad which the doctors recommend
ed long ago. I hope it will cure him. You write that in Petersburg he is spoken o
f as one of the most active, cultivated, and capable of the young men. Forgive my
 vanity as a relation, but I never doubted it. The good he has done to everybody 
here, from his peasants up to the gentry, is incalculable. On his arrival in Pete
rsburg he received only his due. I always wonder at the way rumors fly from Peter
sburg to Moscow, especially such false ones as that you write aboutI mean the rep
ort of my brother's betrothal to the little Rostova. I do not think my brother wi
ll ever marry again, and certainly not her and this is why first, I know that tho
ugh he rarely speaks about the wife he has lost, the grief of that loss has gone 
too deep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a successor and our litt
le angel a stepmother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that girl is not the k
ind of girl who could please Prince Andrew. I do not think he would choose her fo
r a wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I am running on too long and am at th
e end of my second sheet. Goodby, my dear friend. May God keep you in His holy an
d mighty care. My dear friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.  MARY   
   CHAPTER XXVI   In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpecte
d letter from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange and surpr
ising news. He informed her of his engagement to Natasha Rostova. The whole lette
r breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tender and confiding affection fo
r his sister. He wrote that he had never loved as he did now and that only now di
d he understand and know what life was. He asked his sister to forgive him for no
t having told her of his resolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, though he h
ad spoken of it to his father. He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should a
sk her father to give his consent, irritating him and having to bear the brunt of
 his displeasure without attaining her object. "Besides," he wrote, "the matter w
as not then so definitely settled as it is now. My father then insisted on a dela
y of a year and now already six months, half of that period, have passed, and my 
resolution is firmer than ever. If the doctors did not keep me here at the spas I
 should be back in Russia, but as it is I have to postpone my return for three mo
nths. You know me and my relations with Father. I want nothing from him. I have b
een and always shall be independent but to go against his will and arouse his ang
er, now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time, would destroy half 
my happiness. I am now writing to him about the same question, and beg you to cho
ose a good moment to hand him the letter and to let me know how he looks at the w
hole matter and whether there is hope that he may consent to reduce the term by f
our months."  After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary gave the
 letter to her father. The next day the old prince said to her quietly  "Write an
d tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won't be longI shall soon set h
im free."  The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her spea
k and, raising his voice more and more, cried  "Marry, marry, my boy!... A good f
amily!... Clever people, eh? Rich, eh? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas wil
l have! Write and tell him that he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be li
ttle Nicholas' stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!... Ha, ha, ha! He mustn't be 
without a stepmother either! Only one thing, no more women are wanted in my house
let him marry and live by himself. Perhaps you will go and live with him too?" he
 added, turning to Princess Mary. "Go in heavens name! Go out into the frost... t
he frost... the frost!"  After this outburst the prince did not speak any more ab
out the matter. But repressed vexation at his son's poorspirited behavior found e
xpression in his treatment of his daughter. To his former pretexts for irony a fr
esh one was now addedallusions to stepmothers and amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bo
urienne.  "Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his daughter. "She'll make a sple
ndid princess!"  And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Mary no
ticed that her father was really associating more and more with the Frenchwoman. 
She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of his letter, but comforted him w
ith hopes of reconciling their father to the idea.  Little Nicholas and his educa
tion, her brother Andrew, and religion were Princess Mary's joys and consolations
 but besides that, since everyone must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the 
profoundest depths of her heart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chi
ef consolation of her life. This comforting dream and hope were given her by God'
s folkthe halfwitted and other pilgrims who visited her without the prince's know
ledge. The longer she lived, the more experience and observation she had of life,
 the greater was her wonder at the shortsightedness of men who seek enjoyment and
 happiness here on earth toiling, suffering, struggling, and harming one another,
 to obtain that impossible, visionary, sinful happiness. Prince Andrew had loved 
his wife, she died, but that was not enough he wanted to bind his happiness to an
other woman. Her father objected to this because he wanted a more distinguished a
nd wealthier match for Andrew. And they all struggled and suffered and tormented 
one another and injured their souls, their eternal souls, for the attainment of b
enefits which endure but for an instant. Not only do we know this ourselves, but 
Christ, the Son of God, came down to earth and told us that this life is but for 
a moment and is a probation yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it.
 "How is it that no one realizes this?" thought Princess Mary. "No one except the
se despised God's folk who, wallet on back, come to me by the back door, afraid o
f being seen by the prince, not for fear of illusage by him but for fear of causi
ng him to sin. To leave family, home, and all the cares of worldly welfare, in or
der without clinging to anything to wander in hempen rags from place to place und
er an assumed name, doing no one any harm but praying for allfor those who drive 
one away as well as for those who protect one higher than that life and truth the
re is no life or truth!"  There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman 
of fifty called Theodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and 
worn heavy chains. Princess Mary was particularly fond of her. Once, when in a ro
om with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talking of her life, the t
hought that Theodosia alone had found the true path of life suddenly came to Prin
cess Mary with such force that she resolved to become a pilgrim herself. When The
odosia had gone to sleep Princess Mary thought about this for a long time, and at
 last made up her mind that, strange as it might seem, she must go on a pilgrimag
e. She disclosed this thought to no one but to her confessor, Father Akinfi, the 
monk, and he approved of her intention. Under guise of a present for the pilgrims
, Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim's complete costume for herself a coarse smock,
 bast shoes, a rough coat, and a black kerchief. Often, approaching the chest of 
drawers containing this secret treasure, Princess Mary paused, uncertain whether 
the time had not already come to put her project into execution.  Often, listenin
g to the pilgrims' tales, she was so stimulated by their simple speech, mechanica
l to them but to her so full of deep meaning, that several times she was on the p
oint of abandoning everything and running away from home. In imagination she alre
ady pictured herself by Theodosia's side, dressed in coarse rags, walking with a 
staff, a wallet on her back, along the dusty road, directing her wanderings from 
one saint's shrine to another, free from envy, earthly love, or desire, and reach
ing at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sighing, but eternal joy a
nd bliss.  "I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time to get
 used to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther. I will go on till my legs 
fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, and shall at last reach that eternal, 
quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow nor sighing..." thought Princess Mary.
  But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little Koko Nicholas, he
r resolve weakened. She wept quietly, and felt that she was a sinner who loved he
r father and little nephew more than God.      BOOK SEVEN 1810  11      CHAPTER I
   The Bible legend tells us that the absence of laboridlenesswas a condition of 
the first man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen man has retained a love of id
leness, but the curse weighs on the race not only because we have to seek our bre
ad in the sweat of our brows, but because our moral nature is such that we cannot
 be both idle and at ease. An inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we are 
idle. If man could find a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilli
ng his duty, he would have found one of the conditions of man's primitive blessed
ness. And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idleness is the lot of a 
whole classthe military. The chief attraction of military service has consisted a
nd will consist in this compulsory and irreproachable idleness.  Nicholas Rostov 
experienced this blissful condition to the full when, after 1807, he continued to
 serve in the Pavlograd regiment, in which he already commanded the squadron he h
ad taken over from Denisov.  Rostov had become a bluff, goodnatured fellow, whom 
his Moscow acquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was liked
 and respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and was well content
ed with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in letters from home more frequent c
omplaints from his mother that their affairs were falling into greater and greate
r disorder, and that it was time for him to come back to gladden and comfort his 
old parents.  Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to ta
ke him away from surroundings in which, protected from all the entanglements of l
ife, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felt that sooner or later he would h
ave to reenter that whirlpool of life, with its embarrassments and affairs to be 
straightened out, its accounts with stewards, quarrels, and intrigues, its ties, 
society, and with Sonya's love and his promise to her. It was all dreadfully diff
icult and complicated and he replied to his mother in cold, formal letters in Fre
nch, beginning "My dear Mamma," and ending "Your obedient son," which said nothin
g of when he would return. In 1810 he received letters from his parents, in which
 they told him of Natasha's engagement to Bolkonski, and that the wedding would b
e in a year's time because the old prince made difficulties. This letter grieved 
and mortified Nicholas. In the first place he was sorry that Natasha, for whom he
 cared more than for anyone else in the family, should be lost to the home and se
condly, from his hussar point of view, he regretted not to have been there to sho
w that fellow Bolkonski that connection with him was no such great honor after al
l, and that if he loved Natasha he might dispense with permission from his dotard
 father. For a moment he hesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order
 to see Natasha before she was married, but then came the maneuvers, and consider
ations about Sonya and about the confusion of their affairs, and Nicholas again p
ut it off. But in the spring of that year, he received a letter from his mother, 
written without his father's knowledge, and that letter persuaded him to return. 
She wrote that if he did not come and take matters in hand, their whole property 
would be sold by auction and they would all have to go begging. The count was so 
weak, and trusted Mitenka so much, and was so goodnatured, that everybody took ad
vantage of him and things were going from bad to worse. "For God's sake, I implor
e you, come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family wretched,"
 wrote the countess.  This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of a
 matteroffact man which showed him what he ought to do.  The right thing now was,
 if not to retire from the service, at any rate to go home on leave. Why he had t
o go he did not know but after his afterdinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars,
 an extremely vicious gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time, and
 when he returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrushka Denisov's
 servant who had remained with him and his comrades who turned up in the evening 
that he was applying for leave and was going home. Difficult and strange as it wa
s for him to reflect that he would go away without having heard from the staffand
 this interested him extremelywhether he was promoted to a captaincy or would rec
eive the Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers strange as it was to think that
 he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish Count Golukho
vski, who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had betted he would sell for two t
housand rubles incomprehensible as it seemed that the ball the hussars were givin
g in honor of the Polish Mademoiselle Przazdziecka out of rivalry to the Uhlans w
ho had given one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska would take pla
ce without himhe knew he must go away from this good, bright world to somewhere w
here everything was stupid and confused. A week later he obtained his leave. His 
hussar comradesnot only those of his own regiment, but the whole brigadegave Rost
ov a dinner to which the subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which the
re were two bands and two choirs of singers. Rostov danced the Trepak with Major 
Basov the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and dropped Rostov the soldiers of the
 third squadron tossed him too, and shouted "hurrah!" and then they put him in hi
s sleigh and escorted him as far as the first post station.  During the first hal
f of the journeyfrom Kremenchug to Kievall Rostov's thoughts, as is usual in such
 cases, were behind him, with the squadron but when he had gone more than halfway
 he began to forget his three roans and Dozhoyveyko, his quartermaster, and to wo
nder anxiously how things would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there. Thou
ghts of home grew stronger the nearer he approached itfar stronger, as though thi
s feeling of his was subject to the law by which the force of attraction is in in
verse proportion to the square of the distance. At the last post station before O
tradnoe he gave the driver a threeruble tip, and on arriving he ran breathlessly,
 like a boy, up the steps of his home.  After the rapture of meeting, and after t
hat odd feeling of unsatisfied expectationthe feeling that "everything is just th
e same, so why did I hurry?"Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world. 
His father and mother were much the same, only a little older. What was new in th
em was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord, which there used not to be, a
nd which, as Nicholas soon found out, was due to the bad state of their affairs. 
Sonya was nearly twenty she had stopped growing prettier and promised nothing mor
e than she was already, but that was enough. She exhaled happiness and love from 
the time Nicholas returned, and the faithful, unalterable love of this girl had a
 gladdening effect on him. Petya and Natasha surprised Nicholas most. Petya was a
 big handsome boy of thirteen, merry, witty, and mischievous, with a voice that w
as already breaking. As for Natasha, for a long while Nicholas wondered and laugh
ed whenever he looked at her.  "You're not the same at all," he said.  "How? Am I
 uglier?"  "On the contrary, but what dignity? A princess!" he whispered to her. 
 "Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.  She told him about her romance with P
rince Andrew and of his visit to Otradnoe and showed him his last letter.  "Well,
 are you glad?" Natasha asked. "I am so tranquil and happy now."  "Very glad," an
swered Nicholas. "He is an excellent fellow.... And are you very much in love?"  
"How shall I put it?" replied Natasha. "I was in love with Boris, with my teacher
, and with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feel at peace and settled. I k
now that no better man than he exists, and I am calm and contented now. Not at al
l as before."  Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marr
iage for a year but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation, proving to hi
m that it could not be otherwise, and that it would be a bad thing to enter a fam
ily against the father's will, and that she herself wished it so.  "You don't at 
all understand," she said.  Nicholas was silent and agreed with her.  Her brother
 often wondered as he looked at her. She did not seem at all like a girl in love 
and parted from her affianced husband. She was eventempered and calm and quite as
 cheerful as of old. This amazed Nicholas and even made him regard Bolkonski's co
urtship skeptically. He could not believe that her fate was sealed, especially as
 he had not seen her with Prince Andrew. It always seemed to him that there was s
omething not quite right about this intended marriage.  "Why this delay? Why no b
etrothal?" he thought. Once, when he had touched on this topic with his mother, h
e discovered, to his surprise and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth
 of her soul she too had doubts about this marriage.  "You see he writes," said s
he, showing her son a letter of Prince Andrew's, with that latent grudge a mother
 always has in regard to a daughter's future married happiness, "he writes that h
e won't come before December. What can be keeping him? Illness, probably! His hea
lth is very delicate. Don't tell Natasha. And don't attach importance to her bein
g so bright that's because she's living through the last days of her girlhood, bu
t I know what she is like every time we receive a letter from him! However, God g
rant that everything turns out well!" She always ended with these words. "He is a
n excellent man!"      CHAPTER II   After reaching home Nicholas was at first ser
ious and even dull. He was worried by the impending necessity of interfering in t
he stupid business matters for which his mother had called him home. To throw off
 this burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival he went, 
angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where he was going, to M
itenka's lodge and demanded an account of everything. But what an account of ever
ything might be Nicholas knew even less than the frightened and bewildered Mitenk
a. The conversation and the examination of the accounts with Mitenka did not last
 long. The village elder, a peasant delegate, and the village clerk, who were wai
ting in the passage, heard with fear and delight first the young count's voice ro
aring and snapping and rising louder and louder, and then words of abuse, dreadfu
l words, ejaculated one after the other.  "Robber!... Ungrateful wretch!... I'll 
hack the dog to pieces! I'm not my father!... Robbing us!..." and so on.  Then wi
th no less fear and delight they saw how the young count, red in the face and wit
h bloodshot eyes, dragged Mitenka out by the scruff of the neck and applied his f
oot and knee to his behind with great agility at convenient moments between the w
ords, shouting, "Be off! Never let me see your face here again, you villain!"  Mi
tenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the shrubbery. This shru
bbery was a wellknown haven of refuge for culprits at Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, 
returning tipsy from the town, used to hide there, and many of the residents at O
tradnoe, hiding from Mitenka, knew of its protective qualities.  Mitenka's wife a
nd sistersinlaw thrust their heads and frightened faces out of the door of a room
 where a bright samovar was boiling and where the steward's high bedstead stood w
ith its patchwork quilt.  The young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing ha
rd, passed by with resolute strides and went into the house.  The countess, who h
eard at once from the maids what had happened at the lodge, was calmed by the tho
ught that now their affairs would certainly improve, but on the other hand felt a
nxious as to the effect this excitement might have on her son. She went several t
imes to his door on tiptoe and listened, as he lighted one pipe after another.  N
ext day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassed smile, said t
o him  "But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you got excited! Mitenka has told 
me all about it."  "I knew," thought Nicholas, "that I should never understand an
ything in this crazy world."  "You were angry that he had not entered those 700 r
ubles. But they were carried forwardand you did not look at the other page."  "Pa
pa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know he is! And what I have done, I have do
ne but, if you like, I won't speak to him again."  "No, my dear boy" the count, t
oo, felt embarrassed. He knew he had mismanaged his wife's property and was to bl
ame toward his children, but he did not know how to remedy it. "No, I beg you to 
attend to the business. I am old. I..."  "No, Papa. Forgive me if I have caused y
ou unpleasantness. I understand it all less than you do."  "Devil take all these 
peasants, and money matters, and carryings forward from page to page," he thought
. "I used to understand what a 'corner' and the stakes at cards meant, but carryi
ng forward to another page I don't understand at all," said he to himself, and af
ter that he did not meddle in business affairs. But once the countess called her 
son and informed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikhaylovna for two
 thousand rubles, and asked him what he thought of doing with it.  "This," answer
ed Nicholas. "You say it rests with me. Well, I don't like Anna Mikhaylovna and I
 don't like Boris, but they were our friends and poor. Well then, this!" and he t
ore up the note, and by so doing caused the old countess to weep tears of joy. Af
ter that, young Rostov took no further part in any business affairs, but devoted 
himself with passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new pursuitthe chasefor w
hich his father kept a large establishment.      CHAPTER III   The weather was al
ready growing wintry and morning frosts congealed an earth saturated by autumn ra
ins. The verdure had thickened and its bright green stood out sharply against the
 brownish strips of winter rye trodden down by the cattle, and against the paleye
llow stubble of the spring buckwheat. The wooded ravines and the copses, which at
 the end of August had still been green islands amid black fields and stubble, ha
d become golden and brightred islands amid the green winter rye. The hares had al
ready half changed their summer coats, the fox cubs were beginning to scatter, an
d the young wolves were bigger than dogs. It was the best time of the year for th
e chase. The hounds of that ardent young sportsman Rostov had not merely reached 
hard winter condition, but were so jaded that at a meeting of the huntsmen it was
 decided to give them a three days' rest and then, on the sixteenth of September,
 to go on a distant expedition, starting from the oak grove where there was an un
disturbed litter of wolf cubs.  All that day the hounds remained at home. It was 
frosty and the air was sharp, but toward evening the sky became overcast and it b
egan to thaw. On the fifteenth, when young Rostov, in his dressing gown, looked o
ut of the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting it was as if
 the sky were melting and sinking to the earth without any wind. The only motion 
in the air was that of the dripping, microscopic particles of drizzling mist. The
 bare twigs in the garden were hung with transparent drops which fell on the fres
hly fallen leaves. The earth in the kitchen garden looked wet and black and glist
ened like poppy seed and at a short distance merged into the dull, moist veil of 
mist. Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch. There was a smell of decayi
ng leaves and of dog. Milka, a blackspotted, broadhaunched bitch with prominent b
lack eyes, got up on seeing her master, stretched her hind legs, lay down like a 
hare, and then suddenly jumped up and licked him right on his nose and mustache. 
Another borzoi, a dog, catching sight of his master from the garden path, arched 
his back and, rushing headlong toward the porch with lifted tail, began rubbing h
imself against his legs.  "Ohoy!" came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman's
 call which unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and round the corne
r came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a gray, wrinkled old man with
 hair cut straight over his forehead, Ukrainian fashion, a long bent whip in his 
hand, and that look of independence and scorn of everything that is only seen in 
huntsmen. He doffed his Circassian cap to his master and looked at him scornfully
. This scorn was not offensive to his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel, dis
dainful of everybody and who considered himself above them, was all the same his 
serf and huntsman.  "Daniel!" Nicholas said timidly, conscious at the sight of th
e weather, the hounds, and the huntsman that he was being carried away by that ir
resistible passion for sport which makes a man forget all his previous resolution
s, as a lover forgets in the presence of his mistress.  "What orders, your excell
ency?" said the huntsman in his deep bass, deep as a protodeacon's and hoarse wit
h hallooingand two flashing black eyes gazed from under his brows at his master, 
who was silent. "Can you resist it?" those eyes seemed to be asking.  "It's a goo
d day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?" asked Nicholas, scratching Milka behind 
the ears.  Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.  "I sent Uvarka at dawn to 
listen," his bass boomed out after a minute's pause. "He says she's moved them in
to the Otradnoe enclosure. They were howling there." This meant that the shewolf,
 about whom they both knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a smal
l place a mile and a half from the house.  "We ought to go, don't you think so?" 
said Nicholas. "Come to me with Uvarka."  "As you please."  "Then put off feeding
 them."  "Yes, sir."  Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicho
las' big study. Though Daniel was not a big man, to see him in a room was like se
eing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and surroundings of human
 life. Daniel himself felt this, and as usual stood just inside the door, trying 
to speak softly and not move, for fear of breaking something in the master's apar
tment, and he hastened to say all that was necessary so as to get from under that
 ceiling, out into the open under the sky once more.  Having finished his inquiri
es and extorted from Daniel an opinion that the hounds were fit Daniel himself wi
shed to go hunting, Nicholas ordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel
 was about to go Natasha came in with rapid steps, not having done up her hair or
 finished dressing and with her old nurse's big shawl wrapped round her. Petya ra
n in at the same time.  "You are going?" asked Natasha. "I knew you would! Sonya 
said you wouldn't go, but I knew that today is the sort of day when you couldn't 
help going."  "Yes, we are going," replied Nicholas reluctantly, for today, as he
 intended to hunt seriously, he did not want to take Natasha and Petya. "We are g
oing, but only wolf hunting it would be dull for you."  "You know it is my greate
st pleasure," said Natasha. "It's not fair you are going by yourself, are having 
the horses saddled and said nothing to us about it."  "'No barrier bars a Russian
's path'we'll go!" shouted Petya.  "But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," said 
Nicholas to Natasha.  "Yes, I'll go. I shall certainly go," said Natasha decisive
ly. "Daniel, tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with my dogs," she
 added to the huntsman.  It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room
 at all, but to have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible. H
e cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business, careful 
as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the young lady.      CHAPTER I
V   The old count, who had always kept up an enormous hunting establishment but h
ad now handed it all completely over to his son's care, being in very good spirit
s on this fifteenth of September, prepared to go out with the others.  In an hour
's time the whole hunting party was at the porch. Nicholas, with a stern and seri
ous air which showed that now was no time for attending to trifles, went past Nat
asha and Petya who were trying to tell him something. He had a look at all the de
tails of the hunt, sent a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry
, mounted his chestnut Donets, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set off
 across the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otradnoe wood. The old cou
nt's horse, a sorrel gelding called Viflyanka, was led by the groom in attendance
 on him, while the count himself was to drive in a small trap straight to a spot 
reserved for him.  They were taking fiftyfour hounds, with six hunt attendants an
d whippersin. Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen and more than
 forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leash belonging to members of th
e family, there were about a hundred and thirty dogs and twenty horsemen.  Each d
og knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew his business, his plac
e, what he had to do. As soon as they had passed the fence they all spread out ev
enly and quietly, without noise or talk, along the road and field leading to the 
Otradnoe covert.  The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now a
nd then splashing into puddles as they crossed a road. The misty sky still seemed
 to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth, the air was still, warm, a
nd silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman, the snort of a horse, the crac
k of a whip, or the whine of a straggling hound could be heard.  When they had go
ne a little less than a mile, five more riders with dogs appeared out of the mist
, approaching the Rostovs. In front rode a freshlooking, handsome old man with a 
large gray mustache.  "Good morning, Uncle!" said Nicholas, when the old man drew
 near.  "That's it. Come on!... I was sure of it," began "Uncle." He was a distan
t relative of the Rostovs', a man of small means, and their neighbor. "I knew you
 wouldn't be able to resist it and it's a good thing you're going. That's it! Com
e on!" This was "Uncle's" favorite expression. "Take the covert at once, for my G
irchik says the Ilagins are at Korniki with their hounds. That's it. Come on!... 
They'll take the cubs from under your very nose."  "That's where I'm going. Shall
 we join up our packs?" asked Nicholas.  The hounds were joined into one pack, an
d "Uncle" and Nicholas rode on side by side. Natasha, muffled up in shawls which 
did not hide her eager face and shining eyes, galloped up to them. She was follow
ed by Petya who always kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, and by a groom 
appointed to look after her. Petya, who was laughing, whipped and pulled at his h
orse. Natasha sat easily and confidently on her black Arabchik and reined him in 
without effort with a firm hand.  "Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Petya an
d Natasha. He did not like to combine frivolity with the serious business of hunt
ing.  "Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" shouted Petya.  "Good morning, goo
d morning! But don't go overriding the hounds," said "Uncle" sternly.  "Nicholas,
 what a fine dog Trunila is! He knew me," said Natasha, referring to her favorite
 hound.  "In the first place, Trunila is not a 'dog,' but a harrier," thought Nic
holas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her feel the distance tha
t ought to separate them at that moment. Natasha understood it.  "You mustn't thi
nk we'll be in anyone's way, Uncle," she said. "We'll go to our places and won't 
budge."  "A good thing too, little countess," said "Uncle," "only mind you don't 
fall off your horse," he added, "becausethat's it, come on!you've nothing to hold
 on to."  The oasis of the Otradnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yards off,
 the huntsmen were already nearing it. Rostov, having finally settled with "Uncle
" where they should set on the hounds, and having shown Natasha where she was to 
standa spot where nothing could possibly run outwent round above the ravine.  "We
ll, nephew, you're going for a big wolf," said "Uncle." "Mind and don't let her s
lip!"  "That's as may happen," answered Rostov. "Karay, here!" he shouted, answer
ing "Uncle's" remark by this call to his borzoi. Karay was a shaggy old dog with 
a hanging jowl, famous for having tackled a big wolf unaided. They all took up th
eir places.  The old count, knowing his son's ardor in the hunt, hurried so as no
t to be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when Count Ilya R
ostov, cheerful, flushed, and with quivering cheeks, drove up with his black hors
es over the winter rye to the place reserved for him, where a wolf might come out
. Having straightened his coat and fastened on his hunting knives and horn, he mo
unted his good, sleek, wellfed, and comfortable horse, Viflyanka, which was turni
ng gray, like himself. His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilya Rostov, tho
ugh not at heart a keen sportsman, knew the rules of the hunt well, and rode to t
he bushy edge of the road where he was to stand, arranged his reins, settled hims
elf in the saddle, and, feeling that he was ready, looked about with a smile.  Be
side him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an old horseman now somewhat 
stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash three formidable wolfhounds, who had, 
however, grown fat like their master and his horse. Two wise old dogs lay down un
leashed. Some hundred paces farther along the edge of the wood stood Mitka, the c
ount's other groom, a daring horseman and keen rider to hounds. Before the hunt, 
by old custom, the count had drunk a silver cupful of mulled brandy, taken a snac
k, and washed it down with half a bottle of his favorite Bordeaux.  He was somewh
at flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes were rather moist and glittered 
more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle, wrapped up in his fur coat, he look
ed like a child taken out for an outing.  The thin, hollowcheeked Chekmar, having
 got everything ready, kept glancing at his master with whom he had lived on the 
best of terms for thirty years, and understanding the mood he was in expected a p
leasant chat. A third person rode up circumspectly through the wood it was plain 
that he had had a lesson and stopped behind the count. This person was a graybear
ded old man in a woman's cloak, with a tall peaked cap on his head. He was the bu
ffoon, who went by a woman's name, Nastasya Ivanovna.  "Well, Nastasya Ivanovna!"
 whispered the count, winking at him. "If you scare away the beast, Daniel'll giv
e it you!"  "I know a thing or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna.  "Hush!" whis
pered the count and turned to Simon. "Have you seen the young countess?" he asked
. "Where is she?"  "With young Count Peter, by the Zharov rank grass," answered S
imon, smiling. "Though she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting."  "And you're su
rprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?" said the count. "She's as good as many 
a man!"  "Of course! It's marvelous. So bold, so easy!"  "And Nicholas? Where is 
he? By the Lyadov upland, isn't he?"  "Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He unde
rstands the matter so well that Daniel and I are often quite astounded," said Sim
on, well knowing what would please his master.  "Rides well, eh? And how well he 
looks on his horse, eh?"  "A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank
 grass by the Zavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place what a sig
ht when they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousand rubles and the 
rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search far to find another as smar
t."  "To search far..." repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had not said mo
re. "To search far," he said, turning back the skirt of his coat to get at his sn
uffbox.  "The other day when he came out from Mass in full uniform, Michael Sidor
ych..." Simon did not finish, for on the still air he had distinctly caught the m
usic of the hunt with only two or three hounds giving tongue. He bent down his he
ad and listened, shaking a warning finger at his master. "They are on the scent o
f the cubs..." he whispered, "straight to the Lyadov uplands."  The count, forget
ting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked into the distance straight befor
e him, down the narrow open space, holding the snuffbox in his hand but not takin
g any. After the cry of the hounds came the deep tones of the wolf call from Dani
el's hunting horn the pack joined the first three hounds and they could be heard 
in full cry, with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates that they are aft
er a wolf. The whippersin no longer set on the hounds, but changed to the cry of 
ulyulyu, and above the others rose Daniel's voice, now a deep bass, now piercingl
y shrill. His voice seemed to fill the whole wood and carried far beyond out into
 the open field.  After listening a few moments in silence, the count and his att
endant convinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs the soun
d of the larger pack, eagerly giving tongue, began to die away in the distance, t
he other pack rushed by the wood past the count, and it was with this that Daniel
's voice was heard calling ulyulyu. The sounds of both packs mingled and broke ap
art again, but both were becoming more distant.  Simon sighed and stooped to stra
ighten the leash a young borzoi had entangled the count too sighed and, noticing 
the snuffbox in his hand, opened it and took a pinch. "Back!" cried Simon to a bo
rzoi that was pushing forward out of the wood. The count started and dropped the 
snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up. The count and Simon were lo
oking at him.  Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt sudden
ly approached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just in fr
ont of them.  The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eye
s starting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him to the other 
side.  "Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showing that he had long frette
d to utter that word, and letting the borzois slip he galloped toward the count. 
 The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left a wolf which,
 softly swaying from side to side, was coming at a quiet lope farther to the left
 to the very place where they were standing. The angry borzois whined and getting
 free of the leash rushed past the horses' feet at the wolf.  The wolf paused, tu
rned its heavy forehead toward the dogs awkwardly, like a man suffering from the 
quinsy, and, still slightly swaying from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and
 with a swish of its tail disappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the same ins
tant, with a cry like a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, sp
rang helterskelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across the fi
eld toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared. The hazel bushes parted 
behind the hounds and Daniel's chestnut horse appeared, dark with sweat. On its l
ong back sat Daniel, hunched forward, capless, his disheveled gray hair hanging o
ver his flushed, perspiring face.  "Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu!..." he cried. When he ca
ught sight of the count his eyes flashed lightning.  "Blast you!" he shouted, hol
ding up his whip threateningly at the count.  "You've let the wolf go!... What sp
ortsmen!" and as if scorning to say more to the frightened and shamefaced count, 
he lashed the heaving flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger 
the count had aroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like a punished s
choolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon's sympathy for his plight.
 But Simon was no longer there. He was galloping round by the bushes while the fi
eld was coming up on both sides, all trying to head the wolf, but it vanished int
o the wood before they could do so.      CHAPTER V   Nicholas Rostov meanwhile re
mained at his post, waiting for the wolf. By the way the hunt approached and rece
ded, by the cries of the dogs whose notes were familiar to him, by the way the vo
ices of the huntsmen approached, receded, and rose, he realized what was happenin
g at the copse. He knew that young and old wolves were there, that the hounds had
 separated into two packs, that somewhere a wolf was being chased, and that somet
hing had gone wrong. He expected the wolf to come his way any moment. He made tho
usands of different conjectures as to where and from what side the beast would co
me and how he would set upon it. Hope alternated with despair. Several times he a
ddressed a prayer to God that the wolf should come his way. He prayed with that p
assionate and shamefaced feeling with which men pray at moments of great exciteme
nt arising from trivial causes. "What would it be to Thee to do this for me?" he 
said to God. "I know Thou art great, and that it is a sin to ask this of Thee, bu
t for God's sake do let the old wolf come my way and let Karay spring at itin sig
ht of 'Uncle' who is watching from over thereand seize it by the throat in a deat
h grip!" A thousand times during that halfhour Rostov cast eager and restless gla
nces over the edge of the wood, with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen 
undergrowth and the gully with its waterworn side and "Uncle's" cap just visible 
above the bush on his right.  "No, I shan't have such luck," thought Rostov, "yet
 what wouldn't it be worth! It is not to be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I a
m always unlucky." Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashed rapidly and cle
arly through his mind. "Only once in my life to get an old wolf, I want only that
!" thought he, straining eyes and ears and looking to the left and then to the ri
ght and listening to the slightest variation of note in the cries of the dogs.  A
gain he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across the deser
ted field. "No, it can't be!" thought Rostov, taking a deep breath, as a man does
 at the coming of something long hoped for. The height of happiness was reachedan
d so simply, without warning, or noise, or display, that Rostov could not believe
 his eyes and remained in doubt for over a second. The wolf ran forward and jumpe
d heavily over a gully that lay in her path. She was an old animal with a gray ba
ck and big reddish belly. She ran without hurry, evidently feeling sure that no o
ne saw her. Rostov, holding his breath, looked round at the borzois. They stood o
r lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation. Old Karay had turned hi
s head and was angrily searching for fleas, baring his yellow teeth and snapping 
at his hind legs.  "Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, pouting his lips. The borzois 
jumped up, jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears. Karay finish
ed scratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got up with quivering tail 
from which tufts of matted hair hung down.  "Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas
 asked himself as the wolf approached him coming from the copse. Suddenly the wol
f's whole physiognomy changed she shuddered, seeing what she had probably never s
een beforehuman eyes fixed upon herand turning her head a little toward Rostov, s
he paused.  "Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward..." the wolf seemed to say t
o herself, and she moved forward without again looking round and with a quiet, lo
ng, easy yet resolute lope.  "Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, a
nd of its own accord his good horse darted headlong downhill, leaping over gullie
s to head off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, running faster still. Nicholas
 did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor see the borzois, no
r the ground over which he went he saw only the wolf, who, increasing her speed, 
bounded on in the same direction along the hollow. The first to come into view wa
s Milka, with her black markings and powerful quarters, gaining upon the wolf. Ne
arer and nearer... now she was ahead of it but the wolf turned its head to face h
er, and instead of putting on speed as she usually did Milka suddenly raised her 
tail and stiffened her forelegs.  "Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.  The reddish
 Lyubim rushed forward from behind Milka, sprang impetuously at the wolf, and sei
zed it by its hindquarters, but immediately jumped aside in terror. The wolf crou
ched, gnashed her teeth, and again rose and bounded forward, followed at the dist
ance of a couple of feet by all the borzois, who did not get any closer to her.  
"She'll get away! No, it's impossible!" thought Nicholas, still shouting with a h
oarse voice.  "Karay, ulyulyu!..." he shouted, looking round for the old borzoi w
ho was now his only hope. Karay, with all the strength age had left him, stretche
d himself to the utmost and, watching the wolf, galloped heavily aside to interce
pt it. But the quickness of the wolf's lope and the borzoi's slower pace made it 
plain that Karay had miscalculated. Nicholas could already see not far in front o
f him the wood where the wolf would certainly escape should she reach it. But, co
ming toward him, he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost straight at the wo
lf. There was still hope. A long, yellowish young borzoi, one Nicholas did not kn
ow, from another leash, rushed impetuously at the wolf from in front and almost k
nocked her over. But the wolf jumped up more quickly than anyone could have expec
ted and, gnashing her teeth, flew at the yellowish borzoi, which, with a piercing
 yelp, fell with its head on the ground, bleeding from a gash in its side.  "Kara
y? Old fellow!..." wailed Nicholas.  Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing 
of the wolf's path, the old dog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was w
ithin five paces of it. As if aware of her danger, the wolf turned her eyes on Ka
ray, tucked her tail yet further between her legs, and increased her speed. But h
ere Nicholas only saw that something happened to Karaythe borzoi was suddenly on 
the wolf, and they rolled together down into a gully just in front of them.  That
 instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf struggling in the gully with the dogs, while
 from under them could be seen her gray hair and outstretched hind leg and her fr
ightened choking head, with her ears laid back Karay was pinning her by the throa
t, was the happiest moment of his life. With his hand on his saddlebow, he was re
ady to dismount and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up from amon
g that mass of dogs, and then her forepaws were on the edge of the gully. She cli
cked her teeth Karay no longer had her by the throat, leaped with a movement of h
er hind legs out of the gully, and having disengaged herself from the dogs, with 
tail tucked in again, went forward. Karay, his hair bristling, and probably bruis
ed or wounded, climbed with difficulty out of the gully.  "Oh my God! Why?" Nicho
las cried in despair.  "Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the other side acros
s the wolf's path and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance. She was
 again hemmed in.  Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" and his huntsman, wer
e all riding round the wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and preparing to dismount
 each moment that the wolf crouched back, and starting forward again every time s
he shook herself and moved toward the wood where she would be safe.  Already, at 
the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing the ulyulyuing, had rushed out from 
the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf, and checked his horse, supposing the affai
r to be over. But when he saw that the horsemen did not dismount and that the wol
f shook herself and ran for safety, Daniel set his chestnut galloping, not at the
 wolf but straight toward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the animal off. 
As a result of this, he galloped up to the wolf just when she had been stopped a 
second time by "Uncle's" borzois.  Daniel galloped up silently, holding a naked d
agger in his left hand and thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse wit
h his whip as if it were a flail.  Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until th
e chestnut, breathing heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body a
nd saw Daniel lying on the wolf's back among the dogs, trying to seize her by the
 ears. It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and to the wolf herself that all 
was now over. The terrified wolf pressed back her ears and tried to rise, but the
 borzois stuck to her. Daniel rose a little, took a step, and with his whole weig
ht, as if lying down to rest, fell on the wolf, seizing her by the ears. Nicholas
 was about to stab her, but Daniel whispered, "Don't! We'll gag her!" and, changi
ng his position, set his foot on the wolf's neck. A stick was thrust between her 
jaws and she was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her legs were bound togeth
er, and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side.  With happy, exha
usted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shying and snorting horse and, a
ccompanied by the dogs yelping at her, took her to the place where they were all 
to meet. The hounds had killed two of the cubs and the borzois three. The huntsme
n assembled with their booty and their stories, and all came to look at the wolf,
 which, with her broadbrowed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her j
aws, gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surrounding her. 
When she was touched, she jerked her bound legs and looked wildly yet simply at e
verybody. Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched the wolf.  "Oh, what a formid
able one!" said he. "A formidable one, eh?" he asked Daniel, who was standing nea
r.  "Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.  The count 
remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter with Daniel.  "Ah, but you 
are a crusty fellow, friend!" said the count.  For sole reply Daniel gave him a s
hy, childlike, meek, and amiable smile.      CHAPTER VI   The old count went home
, and Natasha and Petya promised to return very soon, but as it was still early t
he hunt went farther. At midday they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgro
wn with young trees. Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips.
  Facing him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stood alone in a h
ollow behind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely been loosed before Nicholas he
ard one he knew, Voltorn, giving tongue at intervals other hounds joined in, now 
pausing and now again giving tongue. A moment later he heard a cry from the woode
d ravine that a fox had been found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed 
along the ravine toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.  He saw the whips in
 their red caps galloping along the edge of the ravine, he even saw the hounds, a
nd was expecting a fox to show itself at any moment on the ryefield opposite.  Th
e huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois, and Nicholas saw 
a queer, shortlegged red fox with a fine brush going hard across the field. The b
orzois bore down on it.... Now they drew close to the fox which began to dodge be
tween the field in sharper and sharper curves, trailing its brush, when suddenly 
a strange white borzoi dashed in followed by a black one, and everything was in c
onfusion the borzois formed a starshaped figure, scarcely swaying their bodies an
d with tails turned away from the center of the group. Two huntsmen galloped up t
o the dogs one in a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat.  "What's thi
s?" thought Nicholas. "Where's that huntsman from? He is not 'Uncle's' man."  The
 huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time without strapping it to the s
addle. Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stood near them and there too
 the dogs were lying. The huntsmen waved their arms and did something to the fox.
 Then from that spot came the sound of a horn, with the signal agreed on in case 
of a fight.  "That's Ilagin's huntsman having a row with our Ivan," said Nicholas
' groom.  Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him, and rode at a f
ootpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together. Several of
 the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on.  Nicholas dismounte
d, and with Natasha and Petya, who had ridden up, stopped near the hounds, waitin
g to see how the matter would end. Out of the bushes came the huntsman who had be
en fighting and rode toward his young master, with the fox tied to his crupper. W
hile still at a distance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully, but
 he was pale and breathless and his face was angry. One of his eyes was black, bu
t he probably was not even aware of it.  "What has happened?" asked Nicholas.  "A
 likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my gray bitch that c
aught it! Go to law, indeed!... He snatches at the fox! I gave him one with the f
ox. Here it is on my saddle! Do you want a taste of this?..." said the huntsman, 
pointing to his dagger and probably imagining himself still speaking to his foe. 
 Nicholas, not stopping to talk to the man, asked his sister and Petya to wait fo
r him and rode to the spot where the enemy's, Ilagin's, hunting party was.  The v
ictorious huntsman rode off to join the field, and there, surrounded by inquiring
 sympathizers, recounted his exploits.  The facts were that Ilagin, with whom the
 Rostovs had a quarrel and were at law, hunted over places that belonged by custo
m to the Rostovs, and had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods th
e Rostovs were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had chased.  Nicho
las, though he had never seen Ilagin, with his usual absence of moderation in jud
gment, hated him cordially from reports of his arbitrariness and violence, and re
garded him as his bitterest foe. He rode in angry agitation toward him, firmly gr
asping his whip and fully prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps 
to punish his enemy.  Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout ge
ntleman in a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome ravenblack horse, ac
companied by two hunt servants.  Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilagin a 
stately and courteous gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young co
unt's acquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, Ilagin raised his beaver cap an
d said he much regretted what had occurred and would have the man punished who ha
d allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else's borzois. He hoped to be
come better acquainted with the count and invited him to draw his covert.  Natash
a, afraid that her brother would do something dreadful, had followed him in some 
excitement. Seeing the enemies exchanging friendly greetings, she rode up to them
. Ilagin lifted his beaver cap still higher to Natasha and said, with a pleasant 
smile, that the young countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as we
ll as in her beauty, of which he had heard much.  To expiate his huntsman's offen
se, Ilagin pressed the Rostovs to come to an upland of his about a mile away whic
h he usually kept for himself and which, he said, swarmed with hares. Nicholas ag
reed, and the hunt, now doubled, moved on.  The way to Iligin's upland was across
 the fields. The hunt servants fell into line. The masters rode together. "Uncle,
" Rostov, and Ilagin kept stealthily glancing at one another's dogs, trying not t
o be observed by their companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own 
borzois.  Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small, purebred, reds
potted bitch on Ilagin's leash, slender but with muscles like steel, a delicate m
uzzle, and prominent black eyes. He had heard of the swiftness of Ilagin's borzoi
s, and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival to his own Milka.  In the middle of a 
sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the year's harvest, Nicholas pointed to 
the redspotted bitch.  "A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone. "
Is she swift?"  "That one? Yes, she's a good dog, gets what she's after," answere
d Ilagin indifferently, of the redspotted bitch Erza, for which, a year before, h
e had given a neighbor three families of house serfs. "So in your parts, too, the
 harvest is nothing to boast of, Count?" he went on, continuing the conversation 
they had begun. And considering it polite to return the young count's compliment,
 Ilagin looked at his borzois and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by
 her breadth. "That blackspotted one of yours is finewell shaped!" said he.  "Yes
, she's fast enough," replied Nicholas, and thought "If only a fullgrown hare wou
ld cross the field now I'd show you what sort of borzoi she is," and turning to h
is groom, he said he would give a ruble to anyone who found a hare.  "I don't und
erstand," continued Ilagin, "how some sportsmen can be so jealous about game and 
dogs. For myself, I can tell you, Count, I enjoy riding in company such as this..
. what could be better?" he again raised his cap to Natasha "but as for counting 
skins and what one takes, I don't care about that."  "Of course not!"  "Or being 
upset because someone else's borzoi and not mine catches something. All I care ab
out is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it not so, Count? For I consider that..."  "
Atu!" came the longdrawn cry of one of the borzoi whippersin, who had halted. He 
stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whip aloft, and again repeated his l
ongdrawn cry, "Atu!" This call and the uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting 
hare.  "Ah, he has found one, I think," said Ilagin carelessly. "Yes, we must rid
e up.... Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seeing in Erza and "Uncle's
" red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had a chance of pitting against his own b
orzois. "And suppose they outdo my Milka at once!" he thought as he rode with "Un
cle" and Ilagin toward the hare.  "A fullgrown one?" asked Ilagin as he approache
d the whip who had sighted the hareand not without agitation he looked round and 
whistled to Erza.  "And you, Michael Nikanorovich?" he said, addressing "Uncle." 
 The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face.  "How can I join in?
 Why, you've given a village for each of your borzois! That's it, come on! Yours 
are worth thousands. Try yours against one another, you two, and I'll look on!"  
"Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Rugayushka!" he added, involuntarily by this dimi
nutive expressing his affection and the hopes he placed on this red borzoi. Natas
ha saw and felt the agitation the two elderly men and her brother were trying to 
conceal, and was herself excited by it.  The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll 
holding up his whip and the gentlefolk rode up to him at a footpace the hounds th
at were far off on the horizon turned away from the hare, and the whips, but not 
the gentlefolk, also moved away. All were moving slowly and sedately.  "How is it
 pointing?" asked Nicholas, riding a hundred paces toward the whip who had sighte
d the hare.  But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost coming
 next morning, was unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on leash rushed downhil
l in full cry after the hare, and from all sides the borzois that were not on lea
sh darted after the hounds and the hare. All the hunt, who had been moving slowly
, shouted, "Stop!" calling in the hounds, while the borzoi whips, with a cry of "
Atu!" galloped across the field setting the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ila
gin, Nicholas, Natasha, and "Uncle" flew, reckless of where and how they went, se
eing only the borzois and the hare and fearing only to lose sight even for an ins
tant of the chase. The hare they had started was a strong and swift one. When he 
jumped up he did not run at once, but pricked his ears listening to the shouting 
and trampling that resounded from all sides at once. He took a dozen bounds, not 
very quickly, letting the borzois gain on him, and, finally having chosen his dir
ection and realized his danger, laid back his ears and rushed off headlong. He ha
d been lying in the stubble, but in front of him was the autumn sowing where the 
ground was soft. The two borzois of the huntsman who had sighted him, having been
 the nearest, were the first to see and pursue him, but they had not gone far bef
ore Ilagin's redspotted Erza passed them, got within a length, flew at the hare w
ith terrible swiftness aiming at his scut, and, thinking she had seized him, roll
ed over like a ball. The hare arched his back and bounded off yet more swiftly. F
rom behind Erza rushed the broadhaunched, blackspotted Milka and began rapidly ga
ining on the hare.  "Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry. It looked as
 if Milka would immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him and flew pas
t. The hare had squatted. Again the beautiful Erza reached him, but when close to
 the hare's scut paused as if measuring the distance, so as not to make a mistake
 this time but seize his hind leg.  "Erza, darling!" Ilagin wailed in a voice unl
ike his own. Erza did not hearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she woul
d have seized her prey, the hare moved and darted along the balk between the wint
er rye and the stubble. Again Erza and Milka were abreast, running like a pair of
 carriage horses, and began to overtake the hare, but it was easier for the hare 
to run on the balk and the borzois did not overtake him so quickly.  "Rugay, Ruga
yushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice just then, and "Uncle's" red borz
oi, straining and curving its back, caught up with the two foremost borzois, push
ed ahead of them regardless of the terrible strain, put on speed close to the har
e, knocked it off the balk onto the ryefield, again put on speed still more vicio
usly, sinking to his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was how, mud
dying his back, he rolled over with the hare. A ring of borzois surrounded him. A
 moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dogs. Only the delighted "
Uncle" dismounted, and cut off a pad, shaking the hare for the blood to drip off,
 and anxiously glancing round with restless eyes while his arms and legs twitched
. He spoke without himself knowing whom to or what about. "That's it, come on! Th
at's a dog!... There, it has beaten them all, the thousandruble as well as the on
eruble borzois. That's it, come on!" said he, panting and looking wrathfully arou
nd as if he were abusing someone, as if they were all his enemies and had insulte
d him, and only now had he at last succeeded in justifying himself. "There are yo
ur thousandruble ones.... That's it, come on!..."  "Rugay, here's a pad for you!"
 he said, throwing down the hare's muddy pad. "You've deserved it, that's it, com
e on!"  "She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down three times by herself," said
 Nicholas, also not listening to anyone and regardless of whether he were heard o
r not.  "But what is there in running across it like that?" said Ilagin's groom. 
 "Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could take it," Ilagin w
as saying at the same time, breathless from his gallop and his excitement. At the
 same moment Natasha, without drawing breath, screamed joyously, ecstatically, an
d so piercingly that it set everyone's ear tingling. By that shriek she expressed
 what the others expressed by all talking at once, and it was so strange that she
 must herself have been ashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have bee
n amazed at it at any other time. "Uncle" himself twisted up the hare, threw it n
eatly and smartly across his horse's back as if by that gesture he meant to rebuk
e everybody, and, with an air of not wishing to speak to anyone, mounted his bay 
and rode off. The others all followed, dispirited and shamefaced, and only much l
ater were they able to regain their former affectation of indifference. For a lon
g time they continued to look at red Rugay who, his arched back spattered with mu
d and clanking the ring of his leash, walked along just behind "Uncle's" horse wi
th the serene air of a conqueror.  "Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's
 not a question of coursing. But when it is, then look out!" his appearance seeme
d to Nicholas to be saying.  When, much later, "Uncle" rode up to Nicholas and be
gan talking to him, he felt flattered that, after what had happened, "Uncle" deig
ned to speak to him.      CHAPTER VII   Toward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicho
las, who found that they were so far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer t
hat the hunting party should spend the night in his little village of Mikhaylovna
.  "And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That's it, come on!"
 said "Uncle." "You see it's damp weather, and you could rest, and the little cou
ntess could be driven home in a trap."  "Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman 
was sent to Otradnoe for a trap, while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to "U
ncle's" house.  Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the 
front porch to meet their master. A score of women serfs, old and young, as well 
as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look at the hunters who 
were arriving. The presence of Natashaa woman, a lady, and on horsebackraised the
 curiosity of the serfs to such a degree that many of them came up to her, stared
 her in the face, and unabashed by her presence made remarks about her as though 
she were some prodigy on show and not a human being able to hear or understand wh
at was said about her.  "Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her 
skirt dangles.... See, she's got a little hunting horn!"  "Goodness gracious! See
 her knife?..."  "Isn't she a Tartar!"  "How is it you didn't go head over heels?
" asked the boldest of all, addressing Natasha directly.  "Uncle" dismounted at t
he porch of his little wooden house which stood in the midst of an overgrown gard
en and, after a glance at his retainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfl
uous ones should take themselves off and that all necessary preparations should b
e made to receive the guests and the visitors.  The serfs all dispersed. "Uncle" 
lifted Natasha off her horse and taking her hand led her up the rickety wooden st
eps of the porch. The house, with its bare, unplastered log walls, was not overcl
eanit did not seem that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotlessbut neithe
r was it noticeably neglected. In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples, an
d wolf and fox skins hung about.  "Uncle" led the visitors through the anteroom i
nto a small hall with a folding table and red chairs, then into the drawing room 
with a round birchwood table and a sofa, and finally into his private room where 
there was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of Suvorov, of the host's
 father and mother, and of himself in military uniform. The study smelt strongly 
of tobacco and dogs. "Uncle" asked his visitors to sit down and make themselves a
t home, and then went out of the room. Rugay, his back still muddy, came into the
 room and lay down on the sofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth. Leadi
ng from the study was a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could b
e seen. From behind this came women's laughter and whispers. Natasha, Nicholas, a
nd Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa. Petya, leaning on his elb
ow, fell asleep at once. Natasha and Nicholas were silent. Their faces glowed, th
ey were hungry and very cheerful. They looked at one another now that the hunt wa
s over and they were in the house, Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to 
show his manly superiority over his sister, Natasha gave him a wink, and neither 
refrained long from bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had
 a pretext ready to account for it.  After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack 
coat, blue trousers, and small top boots. And Natasha felt that this costume, the
 very one she had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just the 
right thing and not at all worse than a swallowtail or frock coat. "Uncle" too wa
s in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother's and sister's laugh
ter it could never enter his head that they might be laughing at his way of life 
he himself joined in the merriment.  "That's right, young countess, that's it, co
me on! I never saw anyone like her!" said he, offering Nicholas a pipe with a lon
g stem and, with a practiced motion of three fingers, taking down another that ha
d been cut short. "She's ridden all day like a man, and is as fresh as ever!"  So
on after "Uncle's" reappearance the door was opened, evidently from the sound by 
a barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, goodlooking woman of about forty, with a do
uble chin and full red lips, entered carrying a large loaded tray. With hospitabl
e dignity and cordiality in her glance and in every motion, she looked at the vis
itors and, with a pleasant smile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptional
 stoutness, which caused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her
 head, this woman who was "Uncle's" housekeeper trod very lightly. She went to th
e table, set down the tray, and with her plump white hands deftly took from it th
e bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes and arranged them on the table. W
hen she had finished, she stepped aside and stopped at the door with a smile on h
er face. "Here I am. I am she! Now do you understand 'Uncle'?" her expression sai
d to Rostov. How could one help understanding? Not only Nicholas, but even Natash
a understood the meaning of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile that
 slightly puckered his lips when Anisya Fedorovna entered. On the tray was a bott
le of herb wine, different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms, rye cakes made with
 buttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead and sparkling mead, apples, nuts raw a
nd roasted, and nutandhoney sweets. Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chic
ken, ham, preserves made with honey, and preserves made with sugar.  All this was
 the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeeping, gathered and prepared by her. The 
smell and taste of it all had a smack of Anisya Fedorovna herself a savor of juic
iness, cleanliness, whiteness, and pleasant smiles.  "Take this, little LadyCount
ess!" she kept saying, as she offered Natasha first one thing and then another.  
Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten such buttermilk
 cakes, such aromatic jam, such honeyandnut sweets, or such a chicken anywhere. A
nisya Fedorovna left the room.  After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov an
d "Uncle" talked of past and future hunts, of Rugay and Ilagin's dogs, while Nata
sha sat upright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes. She tried several t
imes to wake Petya that he might eat something, but he only muttered incoherent w
ords without waking up. Natasha felt so lighthearted and happy in these novel sur
roundings that she only feared the trap would come for her too soon. After a casu
al pause, such as often occurs when receiving friends for the first time in one's
 own house, "Uncle," answering a thought that was in his visitors' mind, said  "T
his, you see, is how I am finishing my days... Death will come. That's it, come o
n! Nothing will remain. Then why harm anyone?"  "Uncle's" face was very significa
nt and even handsome as he said this. Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good 
he had heard about him from his father and the neighbors. Throughout the whole pr
ovince "Uncle" had the reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested o
f cranks. They called him in to decide family disputes, chose him as executor, co
nfided secrets to him, elected him to be a justice and to other posts but he alwa
ys persistently refused public appointments, passing the autumn and spring in the
 fields on his bay gelding, sitting at home in winter, and lying in his overgrown
 garden in summer.  "Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?"  "I did once, but g
ave it up. I am not fit for it. That's it, come on! I can't make head or tail of 
it. That's for youI haven't brains enough. Now, hunting is another matterthat's i
t, come on! Open the door, there!" he shouted. "Why have you shut it?"  The door 
at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen's room, as they called the room for
 the hunt servants.  There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand op
ened the door into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of a bal
alayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, was playing. Nata
sha had been listening to those strains for some time and now went out into the p
assage to hear better.  "That's Mitka, my coachman.... I have got him a good bala
layka. I'm fond of it," said "Uncle."  It was the custom for Mitka to play the ba
lalayka in the huntsmen's room when "Uncle" returned from the chase. "Uncle" was 
fond of such music.  "How good! Really very good!" said Nicholas with some uninte
ntional superciliousness, as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased him ve
ry much.  "Very good?" said Natasha reproachfully, noticing her brother's tone. "
Not 'very good' it's simply delicious!"  Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, hon
ey, and cherry brandy had seemed to her the best in the world, so also that song,
 at that moment, seemed to her the acme of musical delight.  "More, please, more!
" cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalayka ceased. Mitka tuned up afres
h, and recommenced thrumming the balalayka to the air of My Lady, with trills and
 variations. "Uncle" sat listening, slightly smiling, with his head on one side. 
The air was repeated a hundred times. The balalayka was retuned several times and
 the same notes were thrummed again, but the listeners did not grow weary of it a
nd wished to hear it again and again. Anisya Fedorovna came in and leaned her por
tly person against the doorpost.  "You like listening?" she said to Natasha, with
 a smile extremely like "Uncle's." "That's a good player of ours," she added.  "H
e doesn't play that part right!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with an energetic gesture
. "Here he ought to burst outthat's it, come on!ought to burst out."  "Do you pla
y then?" asked Natasha.  "Uncle" did not answer, but smiled.  "Anisya, go and see
 if the strings of my guitar are all right. I haven't touched it for a long time.
 That's itcome on! I've given it up."  Anisya Fedorovna, with her light step, wil
lingly went to fulfill her errand and brought back the guitar.  Without looking a
t anyone, "Uncle" blew the dust off it and, tapping the case with his bony finger
s, tuned the guitar and settled himself in his armchair. He took the guitar a lit
tle above the fingerboard, arching his left elbow with a somewhat theatrical gest
ure, and, with a wink at Anisya Fedorovna, struck a single chord, pure and sonoro
us, and then quietly, smoothly, and confidently began playing in very slow time, 
not My Lady, but the wellknown song Came a maiden down the street. The tune, play
ed with precision and in exact time, began to thrill in the hearts of Nicholas an
d Natasha, arousing in them the same kind of sober mirth as radiated from Anisya 
Fedorovna's whole being. Anisya Fedorovna flushed, and drawing her kerchief over 
her face went laughing out of the room. "Uncle" continued to play correctly, care
fully, with energetic firmness, looking with a changed and inspired expression at
 the spot where Anisya Fedorovna had just stood. Something seemed to be laughing 
a little on one side of his face under his gray mustaches, especially as the song
 grew brisker and the time quicker and when, here and there, as he ran his finger
s over the strings, something seemed to snap.  "Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go 
on!" shouted Natasha as soon as he had finished. She jumped up and hugged and kis
sed him. "Nicholas, Nicholas!" she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him
 "What is it moves me so?"  Nicholas too was greatly pleased by "Uncle's" playing
, and "Uncle" played the piece over again. Anisya Fedorovna's smiling face reappe
ared in the doorway and behind hers other faces...      Fetching water clear and 
sweet,     Stop, dear maiden, I entreat  played "Uncle" once more, running his fi
ngers skillfully over the strings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoul
ders.  "Go on, Uncle dear," Natasha wailed in an imploring tone as if her life de
pended on it.  "Uncle" rose, and it was as if there were two men in him one of th
em smiled seriously at the merry fellow, while the merry fellow struck a naive an
d precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance.  "Now then, niece!" he exclaimed,
 waving to Natasha the hand that had just struck a chord.  Natasha threw off the 
shawl from her shoulders, ran forward to face "Uncle," and setting her arms akimb
o also made a motion with her shoulders and struck an attitude.  Where, how, and 
when had this young countess, educated by an emigree French governess, imbibed fr
om the Russian air she breathed that spirit and obtained that manner which the pa
s de chale * would, one would have supposed, long ago have effaced? But the spiri
t and the movements were those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that "Uncl
e" had expected of her. As soon as she had struck her pose, and smiled triumphant
ly, proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that had at first seized Nicholas a
nd the others that she might not do the right thing was at an end, and they were 
already admiring her.       * The French shawl dance.   She did the right thing w
ith such precision, such complete precision, that Anisya Fedorovna, who had at on
ce handed her the handkerchief she needed for the dance, had tears in her eyes, t
hough she laughed as she watched this slim, graceful countess, reared in silks an
d velvets and so different from herself, who yet was able to understand all that 
was in Anisya and in Anisya's father and mother and aunt, and in every Russian ma
n and woman.  "Well, little countess that's itcome on!" cried "Uncle," with a joy
ous laugh, having finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a fine young fellow 
must be found as husband for you. That's itcome on!"  "He's chosen already," said
 Nicholas smiling.  "Oh?" said "Uncle" in surprise, looking inquiringly at Natash
a, who nodded her head with a happy smile.  "And such a one!" she said. But as so
on as she had said it a new train of thoughts and feelings arose in her. "What di
d Nicholas' smile mean when he said 'chosen already'? Is he glad of it or not? It
 is as if he thought my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand our gaiety. 
But he would understand it all. Where is he now?" she thought, and her face sudde
nly became serious. But this lasted only a second. "Don't dare to think about it,
" she said to herself, and sat down again smilingly beside "Uncle," begging him t
o play something more.  "Uncle" played another song and a valse then after a paus
e he cleared his throat and sang his favorite hunting song      As 'twas growing 
dark last night     Fell the snow so soft and light...   "Uncle" sang as peasants
 sing, with full and naive conviction that the whole meaning of a song lies in th
e words and that the tune comes of itself, and that apart from the words there is
 no tune, which exists only to give measure to the words. As a result of this the
 unconsidered tune, like the song of a bird, was extraordinarily good. Natasha wa
s in ecstasies over "Uncle's" singing. She resolved to give up learning the harp 
and to play only the guitar. She asked "Uncle" for his guitar and at once found t
he chords of the song.  After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who h
ad been sent to look for them, arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya. The count and 
countess did not know where they were and were very anxious, said one of the men.
  Petya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the two traps. Natas
ha and Nicholas got into the other. "Uncle" wrapped Natasha up warmly and took le
ave of her with quite a new tenderness. He accompanied them on foot as far as the
 bridge that could not be crossed, so that they had to go round by the ford, and 
he sent huntsmen to ride in front with lanterns.  "Goodby, dear niece," his voice
 called out of the darknessnot the voice Natasha had known previously, but the on
e that had sung As 'twas growing dark last night.  In the village through which t
hey passed there were red lights and a cheerful smell of smoke.  "What a darling 
Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out onto the highroad.  "Yes," return
ed Nicholas. "You're not cold?"  "No. I'm quite, quite all right. I feel so comfo
rtable!" answered Natasha, almost perplexed by her feelings. They remained silent
 a long while. The night was dark and damp. They could not see the horses, but on
ly heard them splashing through the unseen mud.  What was passing in that recepti
ve childlike soul that so eagerly caught and assimilated all the diverse impressi
ons of life? How did they all find place in her? But she was very happy. As they 
were nearing home she suddenly struck up the air of As 'twas growing dark last ni
ghtthe tune of which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last caugh
t.  "Got it?" said Nicholas.  "What were you thinking about just now, Nicholas?" 
inquired Natasha.  They were fond of asking one another that question.  "I?" said
 Nicholas, trying to remember. "Well, you see, first I thought that Rugay, the re
d hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were a man he would always keep Uncle nea
r him, if not for his riding, then for his manner. What a good fellow Uncle is! D
on't you think so?... Well, and you?"  "I? Wait a bit, wait.... Yes, first I thou
ght that we are driving along and imagining that we are going home, but that heav
en knows where we are really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and 
suddenly find that we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland. And then I thought..
. No, nothing else."  "I know, I expect you thought of him," said Nicholas, smili
ng as Natasha knew by the sound of his voice.  "No," said Natasha, though she had
 in reality been thinking about Prince Andrew at the same time as of the rest, an
d of how he would have liked "Uncle." "And then I was saying to myself all the wa
y, 'How well Anisya carried herself, how well!'" And Nicholas heard her spontaneo
us, happy, ringing laughter. "And do you know," she suddenly said, "I know that I
 shall never again be as happy and tranquil as I am now."  "Rubbish, nonsense, hu
mbug!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought "How charming this Natasha of mine is! 
I have no other friend like her and never shall have. Why should she marry? We mi
ght always drive about together!"  "What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" tho
ught Natasha.  "Ah, there are still lights in the drawingroom!" she said, pointin
g to the windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist velvety darkne
ss of the night.      CHAPTER VIII   Count Ilya Rostov had resigned the position 
of Marshal of the Nobility because it involved him in too much expense, but still
 his affairs did not improve. Natasha and Nicholas often noticed their parents co
nferring together anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of selling the fi
ne ancestral Rostov house and estate near Moscow. It was not necessary to enterta
in so freely as when the count had been Marshal, and life at Otradnoe was quieter
 than in former years, but still the enormous house and its lodges were full of p
eople and more than twenty sat down to table every day. These were all their own 
people who had settled down in the house almost as members of the family, or pers
ons who were, it seemed, obliged to live in the count's house. Such were Dimmler 
the musician and his wife, Vogel the dancing master and his family, Belova, an ol
d maiden lady, an inmate of the house, and many others such as Petya's tutors, th
e girls' former governess, and other people who simply found it preferable and mo
re advantageous to live in the count's house than at home. They had not as many v
isitors as before, but the old habits of life without which the count and countes
s could not conceive of existence remained unchanged. There was still the hunting
 establishment which Nicholas had even enlarged, the same fifty horses and fiftee
n grooms in the stables, the same expensive presents and dinner parties to the wh
ole district on name days there were still the count's games of whist and boston,
 at whichspreading out his cards so that everybody could see themhe let himself b
e plundered of hundreds of rubles every day by his neighbors, who looked upon an 
opportunity to play a rubber with Count Rostov as a most profitable source of inc
ome.  The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net, trying not to believe that
 he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step, and feeling too fe
eble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully and patiently to disentangle
 them. The countess, with her loving heart, felt that her children were being rui
ned, that it was not the count's fault for he could not help being what he wastha
t though he tried to hide it he himself suffered from the consciousness of his ow
n and his children's ruin, and she tried to find means of remedying the position.
 From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution, namely, for Nic
holas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to be their last hope and that if Ni
cholas refused the match she had found for him, she would have to abandon the hop
e of ever getting matters right. This match was with Julie Karagina, the daughter
 of excellent and virtuous parents, a girl the Rostovs had known from childhood, 
and who had now become a wealthy heiress through the death of the last of her bro
thers.  The countess had written direct to Julie's mother in Moscow suggesting a 
marriage between their children and had received a favorable answer from her. Kar
agina had replied that for her part she was agreeable, and everything depend on h
er daughter's inclination. She invited Nicholas to come to Moscow.  Several times
 the countess, with tears in her eyes, told her son that now both her daughters w
ere settled, her only wish was to see him married. She said she could lie down in
 her grave peacefully if that were accomplished. Then she told him that she knew 
of a splendid girl and tried to discover what he thought about marriage.  At othe
r times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to Moscow during the holid
ays to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what his mother's remarks were leading to 
and during one of these conversations induced her to speak quite frankly. She tol
d him that her only hope of getting their affairs disentangled now lay in his mar
rying Julie Karagina.  "But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, wo
uld you expect me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of money?" h
e asked his mother, not realizing the cruelty of his question and only wishing to
 show his noblemindedness.  "No, you have not understood me," said his mother, no
t knowing how to justify herself. "You have not understood me, Nikolenka. It is y
our happiness I wish for," she added, feeling that she was telling an untruth and
 was becoming entangled. She began to cry.  "Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that 
you wish it, and you know I will give my life, anything, to put you at ease," sai
d Nicholas. "I would sacrifice anything for youeven my feelings."  But the counte
ss did not want the question put like that she did not want a sacrifice from her 
son, she herself wished to make a sacrifice for him.  "No, you have not understoo
d me, don't let us talk about it," she replied, wiping away her tears.  "Maybe I 
do love a poor girl," said Nicholas to himself. "Am I to sacrifice my feelings an
d my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma could speak so to me. Because Sonya is p
oor I must not love her," he thought, "must not respond to her faithful, devoted 
love? Yet I should certainly be happier with her than with some dolllike Julie. I
 can always sacrifice my feelings for my family's welfare," he said to himself, "
but I can't coerce my feelings. If I love Sonya, that feeling is for me stronger 
and higher than all else."  Nicholas did not go to Moscow, and the countess did n
ot renew the conversation with him about marriage. She saw with sorrow, and somet
imes with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son and the 
portionless Sonya. Though she blamed herself for it, she could not refrain from g
rumbling at and worrying Sonya, often pulling her up without reason, addressing h
er stiffly as "my dear," and using the formal "you" instead of the intimate "thou
" in speaking to her. The kindhearted countess was the more vexed with Sonya beca
use that poor, darkeyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly grateful
 to her benefactors, and so faithfully, unchangingly, and unselfishly in love wit
h Nicholas, that there were no grounds for finding fault with her.  Nicholas was 
spending the last of his leave at home. A fourth letter had come from Prince Andr
ew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would have been on his way back to Russi
a long ago had not his wound unexpectedly reopened in the warm climate, which obl
iged him to defer his return till the beginning of the new year. Natasha was stil
l as much in love with her betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and wa
s still as ready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before but at
 the end of the fourth month of their separation she began to have fits of depres
sion which she could not master. She felt sorry for herself sorry that she was be
ing wasted all this time and of no use to anyonewhile she felt herself so capable
 of loving and being loved.  Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.      
CHAPTER IX   Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn and we
arisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants, and the new dresse
s everyone put on, there were no special festivities, though the calm frost of tw
enty degrees Reaumur, the dazzling sunshine by day, and the starlight of the wint
er nights seemed to call for some special celebration of the season.  On the thir
d day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all the inmates of the house di
spersed to various rooms. It was the dullest time of the day. Nicholas, who had b
een visiting some neighbors that morning, was asleep on the sittingroom sofa. The
 old count was resting in his study. Sonya sat in the drawing room at the round t
able, copying a design for embroidery. The countess was playing patience. Nastasy
a Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two old ladies. Nat
asha came into the room, went up to Sonya, glanced at what she was doing, and the
n went up to her mother and stood without speaking.  "Why are you wandering about
 like an outcast?" asked her mother. "What do you want?"  "Him... I want him... n
ow, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha, with glittering eyes and no sign of a
 smile.  The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter.  "D
on't look at me, Mamma! Don't look I shall cry directly."  "Sit down with me a li
ttle," said the countess.  "Mamma, I want him. Why should I be wasted like this, 
Mamma?"  Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly to h
ide them and left the room.  She passed into the sitting room, stood there thinki
ng awhile, and then went into the maids' room. There an old maidservant was grumb
ling at a young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold from 
the serfs' quarters.  "Stop playingthere's a time for everything," said the old w
oman.  "Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natasha. "Go, Mavrushka, go."  Having r
eleased Mavrushka, Natasha crossed the dancing hall and went to the vestibule. Th
ere an old footman and two young ones were playing cards. They broke off and rose
 as she entered.  "What can I do with them?" thought Natasha.  "Oh, Nikita, pleas
e go... where can I send him?... Yes, go to the yard and fetch a fowl, please, a 
cock, and you, Misha, bring me some oats."  "Just a few oats?" said Misha, cheerf
ully and readily.  "Go, go quickly," the old man urged him.  "And you, Theodore, 
get me a piece of chalk."  On her way past the butler's pantry she told them to s
et a samovar, though it was not at all the time for tea.  Foka, the butler, was t
he most illtempered person in the house. Natasha liked to test her power over him
. He distrusted the order and asked whether the samovar was really wanted.  "Oh d
ear, what a young lady!" said Foka, pretending to frown at Natasha.  No one in th
e house sent people about or gave them as much trouble as Natasha did. She could 
not see people unconcernedly, but had to send them on some errand. She seemed to 
be trying whether any of them would get angry or sulky with her but the serfs ful
filled no one's orders so readily as they did hers. "What can I do, where can I g
o?" thought she, as she went slowly along the passage.  "Nastasya Ivanovna, what 
sort of children shall I have?" she asked the buffoon, who was coming toward her 
in a woman's jacket.  "Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers," answered the buffoon.
  "O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What am I to do wi
th myself?" And tapping with her heels, she ran quickly upstairs to see Vogel and
 his wife who lived on the upper story.  Two governesses were sitting with the Vo
gels at a table, on which were plates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds. The gover
nesses were discussing whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa. Natash
a sat down, listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, and then go
t up again.  "The island of Madagascar," she said, "Madagascar," she repeated, ar
ticulating each syllable distinctly, and, not replying to Madame Schoss who asked
 her what she was saying, she went out of the room.  Her brother Petya was upstai
rs too with the man in attendance on him he was preparing fireworks to let off th
at night.  "Petya! Petya!" she called to him. "Carry me downstairs."  Petya ran u
p and offered her his back. She jumped on it, putting her arms round his neck, an
d he pranced along with her.  "No, don't... the island of Madagascar!" she said, 
and jumping off his back she went downstairs.  Having as it were reviewed her kin
gdom, tested her power, and made sure that everyone was submissive, but that all 
the same it was dull, Natasha betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guita
r, sat down in a dark corner behind a bookcase, and began to run her fingers over
 the strings in the bass, picking out a passage she recalled from an opera she ha
d heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew. What she drew from the guitar would hav
e had no meaning for other listeners, but in her imagination a whole series of re
miniscences arose from those sounds. She sat behind the bookcase with her eyes fi
xed on a streak of light escaping from the pantry door and listened to herself an
d pondered. She was in a mood for brooding on the past.  Sonya passed to the pant
ry with a glass in her hand. Natasha glanced at her and at the crack in the pantr
y door, and it seemed to her that she remembered the light falling through that c
rack once before and Sonya passing with a glass in her hand. "Yes it was exactly 
the same," thought Natasha.  "Sonya, what is this?" she cried, twanging a thick s
tring.  "Oh, you are there!" said Sonya with a start, and came near and listened.
 "I don't know. A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of being wrong.  "There! T
hat's just how she started and just how she came up smiling timidly when all this
 happened before," thought Natasha, "and in just the same way I thought there was
 something lacking in her."  "No, it's the chorus from The WaterCarrier, listen!"
 and Natasha sang the air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it. "Where wer
e you going?" she asked.  "To change the water in this glass. I am just finishing
 the design."  "You always find something to do, but I can't," said Natasha. "And
 where's Nicholas?"  "Asleep, I think."  "Sonya, go and wake him," said Natasha. 
"Tell him I want him to come and sing."  She sat awhile, wondering what the meani
ng of it all having happened before could be, and without solving this problem, o
r at all regretting not having done so, she again passed in fancy to the time whe
n she was with him and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes.  "Oh, if only h
e would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be! And, worst of all, I am gr
owing oldthat's the thing! There won't then be in me what there is now. But perha
ps he'll come today, will come immediately. Perhaps he has come and is sitting in
 the drawing room. Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it." She rose, 
put down the guitar, and went to the drawing room.  All the domestic circle, tuto
rs, governesses, and guests, were already at the tea table. The servants stood ro
und the tablebut Prince Andrew was not there and life was going on as before.  "A
h, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter. "Well, sit down b
y me." But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced round as if looking for somet
hing.  "Mamma!" she muttered, "give him to me, give him, Mamma, quickly, quickly!
" and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.  She sat down at the table
 and listened to the conversation between the elders and Nicholas, who had also c
ome to the table. "My God, my God! The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding hi
s cup and blowing in the same way!" thought Natasha, feeling with horror a sense 
of repulsion rising up in her for the whole household, because they were always t
he same.  After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sitting room, to th
eir favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began.      CHAPTER X 
  "Does it ever happen to you," said Natasha to her brother, when they settled do
wn in the sitting room, "does it ever happen to you to feel as if there were noth
ing more to comenothing that everything good is past? And to feel not exactly dul
l, but sad?"  "I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt like that when everyt
hing was all right and everyone was cheerful. The thought has come into my mind t
hat I was already tired of it all, and that we must all die. Once in the regiment
 I had not gone to some merrymaking where there was music... and suddenly I felt 
so depressed..."  "Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natasha interrupted him. "Whe
n I was quite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when I was punis
hed once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I sat sobbing in the schoolr
oom? I shall never forget it I felt sad and sorry for everyone, for myself, and f
or everyone. And I was innocentthat was the chief thing," said Natasha. "Do you r
emember?"  "I remember," answered Nicholas. "I remember that I came to you afterw
ards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt ashamed to. We were terri
bly absurd. I had a funny doll then and wanted to give it to you. Do you remember
?"  "And do you remember," Natasha asked with a pensive smile, "how once, long, l
ong ago, when we were quite little, Uncle called us into the studythat was in the
 old houseand it was darkwe went in and suddenly there stood..."  "A Negro," chim
ed in Nicholas with a smile of delight. "Of course I remember. Even now I don't k
now whether there really was a Negro, or if we only dreamed it or were told about
 him."  "He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked at 
us..."  "Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas.  "Yes, yes, I do remember somet
hing too," Sonya answered timidly.  "You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about t
hat Negro," said Natasha, "and they say there was no Negro at all. But you see, y
ou remember!"  "Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them."
  "How strange it is! It's as if it were a dream! I like that."  "And do you reme
mber how we rolled hardboiled eggs in the ballroom, and suddenly two old women be
gan spinning round on the carpet? Was that real or not? Do you remember what fun 
it was?"  "Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in the
 porch?"  So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure not the sad 
memories of old age, but poetic, youthful onesthose impressions of one's most dis
tant past in which dreams and realities blendand they laughed with quiet enjoymen
t.  Sonya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, though they shared the s
ame reminiscences.  Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what
 she recalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced. She sim
ply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.  She only really took par
t when they recalled Sonya's first arrival. She told them how afraid she had been
 of Nicholas because he had on a corded jacket and her nurse had told her that sh
e, too, would be sewn up with cords.  "And I remember their telling me that you h
ad been born under a cabbage," said Natasha, "and I remember that I dared not dis
believe it then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable."  Wh
ile they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door of the sitting 
room.  "They have brought the cock, Miss," she said in a whisper.  "It isn't want
ed, Petya. Tell them to take it away," replied Natasha.  In the middle of their t
alk in the sitting room, Dimmler came in and went up to the harp that stood there
 in a corner. He took off its cloth covering, and the harp gave out a jarring sou
nd.  "Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came the old count
ess' voice from the drawing room.  Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natasha
, Nicholas, and Sonya, remarked "How quiet you young people are!"  "Yes, we're ph
ilosophizing," said Natasha, glancing round for a moment and then continuing the 
conversation. They were now discussing dreams.  Dimmler began to play Natasha wen
t on tiptoe noiselessly to the table, took up a candle, carried it out, and retur
ned, seating herself quietly in her former place. It was dark in the room especia
lly where they were sitting on the sofa, but through the big windows the silvery 
light of the full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finished the piece but stil
l sat softly running his fingers over the strings, evidently uncertain whether to
 stop or to play something else.  "Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, movin
g closer to Nicholas and Sonya, "that when one goes on and on recalling memories,
 one at last begins to remember what happened before one was in the world..."  "T
hat is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well, and remembered e
verything. "The Egyptians believed that our souls have lived in animals, and will
 go back into animals again."  "No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," sai
d Natasha, still in a whisper though the music had ceased. "But I am certain that
 we were angels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why we remember.
..."  "May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat down by 
them.  "If we have been angels, why have we fallen lower?" said Nicholas. "No, th
at can't be!"  "Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I was be
fore?" Natasha rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immortalwell then, if I sha
ll always live I must have lived before, lived for a whole eternity."  "Yes, but 
it is hard for us to imagine eternity," remarked Dimmler, who had joined the youn
g folk with a mildly condescending smile but now spoke as quietly and seriously a
s they.  "Why is it hard to imagine eternity?" said Natasha. "It is now today, an
d it will be tomorrow, and always and there was yesterday, and the day before..."
  "Natasha! Now it's your turn. Sing me something," they heard the countess say. 
"Why are you sitting there like conspirators?"  "Mamma, I don't at all want to," 
replied Natasha, but all the same she rose.  None of them, not even the middleage
d Dimmler, wanted to break off their conversation and quit that corner in the sit
ting room, but Natasha got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord. Standing a
s usual in the middle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was 
best, Natasha began to sing her mother's favorite song.  She had said she did not
 want to sing, but it was long since she had sung, and long before she again sang
, as she did that evening. The count, from his study where he was talking to Mite
nka, heard her and, like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered in 
his talk while giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped, while Mitenka s
tood in front of him also listening and smiling. Nicholas did not take his eyes o
ff his sister and drew breath in time with her. Sonya, as she listened, thought o
f the immense difference there was between herself and her friend, and how imposs
ible it was for her to be anything like as bewitching as her cousin. The old coun
tess sat with a blissful yet sad smile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally s
haking her head. She thought of Natasha and of her own youth, and of how there wa
s something unnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prin
ce Andrew.  Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened with cl
osed eyes.  "Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a European talent, she has n
othing to learnwhat softness, tenderness, and strength...."  "Ah, how afraid I am
 for her, how afraid I am!" said the countess, not realizing to whom she was spea
king. Her maternal instinct told her that Natasha had too much of something, and 
that because of this she would not be happy. Before Natasha had finished singing,
 fourteenyearold Petya rushed in delightedly, to say that some mummers had arrive
d.  Natasha stopped abruptly.  "Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, running 
to a chair, threw herself on it, sobbing so violently that she could not stop for
 a long time.  "It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing only Petya startled me,"
 she said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs still choked her.
  The mummers some of the house serfs dressed up as bears, Turks, innkeepers, and
 ladiesfrightening and funnybringing in with them the cold from outside and a fee
ling of gaiety, crowded, at first timidly, into the anteroom, then hiding behind 
one another they pushed into the ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and
 more merrily and heartily, they started singing, dancing, and playing Christmas 
games. The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at their costumes, 
went into the drawing room. The count sat in the ballroom, smiling radiantly and 
applauding the players. The young people had disappeared.  Half an hour later the
re appeared among the other mummers in the ballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt
this was Nicholas. A Turkish girl was Petya. A clown was Dimmler. An hussar was N
atasha, and a Circassian was Sonya with burntcork mustache and eyebrows.  After t
he condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, from those who were not th
emselves dressed up, the young people decided that their costumes were so good th
at they ought to be shown elsewhere.  Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendi
d condition, wanted to take them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take 
with them about a dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's."  "No, why dis
turb the old fellow?" said the countess. "Besides, you wouldn't have room to turn
 round there. If you must go, go to the Melyukovs'."  Melyukova was a widow, who,
 with her family and their tutors and governesses, lived three miles from the Ros
tovs.  "That's right, my dear," chimed in the old count, thoroughly aroused. "I'l
l dress up at once and go with them. I'll make Pashette open her eyes."  But the 
countess would not agree to his going he had had a bad leg all these last days. I
t was decided that the count must not go, but that if Louisa Ivanovna Madame Scho
ss would go with them, the young ladies might go to the Melyukovs', Sonya, genera
lly so timid and shy, more urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to re
fuse.  Sonya's costume was the best of all. Her mustache and eyebrows were extrao
rdinarily becoming. Everyone told her she looked very handsome, and she was in a 
spirited and energetic mood unusual with her. Some inner voice told her that now 
or never her fate would be decided, and in her male attire she seemed quite a dif
ferent person. Louisa Ivanovna consented to go, and in half an hour four troyka s
leighs with large and small bells, their runners squeaking and whistling over the
 frozen snow, drove up to the porch.  Natasha was foremost in setting a merry hol
iday tone, which, passing from one to another, grew stronger and reached its clim
ax when they all came out into the frost and got into the sleighs, talking, calli
ng to one another, laughing, and shouting.  Two of the troykas were the usual hou
sehold sleighs, the third was the old count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud 
as shaft horse, the fourth was Nicholas' own with a short shaggy black shaft hors
e. Nicholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted his hussar overcoat
, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.  It was so light that he coul
d see the moonlight reflected from the metal harness disks and from the eyes of t
he horses, who looked round in alarm at the noisy party under the shadow of the p
orch roof.  Natasha, Sonya, Madame Schoss, and two maids got into Nicholas' sleig
h Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and the rest of the mummers
 seated themselves in the other two sleighs.  "You go ahead, Zakhar!" shouted Nic
holas to his father's coachman, wishing for a chance to race past him.  The old c
ount's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward, squeaking on its runn
ers as though freezing to the snow, its deeptoned bell clanging. The side horses,
 pressing against the shafts of the middle horse, sank in the snow, which was dry
 and glittered like sugar, and threw it up.  Nicholas set off, following the firs
t sleigh behind him the others moved noisily, their runners squeaking. At first t
hey drove at a steady trot along the narrow road. While they drove past the garde
n the shadows of the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliant 
moonlight, but as soon as they were past the fence, the snowy plain bathed in moo
nlight and motionless spread out before them glittering like diamonds and dappled
 with bluish shadows. Bang, bang! went the first sleigh over a cradle hole in the
 snow of the road, and each of the other sleighs jolted in the same way, and rude
ly breaking the frostbound stillness, the troykas began to speed along the road, 
one after the other.  "A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Natasha's voice
 through the frostbound air.  "How light it is, Nicholas!" came Sonya's voice.  N
icholas glanced round at Sonya, and bent down to see her face closer. Quite a new
, sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up at him from her sable fu
rsso close and yet so distantin the moonlight.  "That used to be Sonya," thought 
he, and looked at her closer and smiled.  "What is it, Nicholas?"  "Nothing," sai
d he and turned again to the horses.  When they came out onto the beaten highroad
polished by sleigh runners and cut up by roughshod hoofs, the marks of which were
 visible in the moonlightthe horses began to tug at the reins of their own accord
 and increased their pace. The near side horse, arching his head and breaking int
o a short canter, tugged at his traces. The shaft horse swayed from side to side,
 moving his ears as if asking "Isn't it time to begin now?" In front, already far
 ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringing farther and farther off, the black hor
ses driven by Zakhar could be clearly seen against the white snow. From that slei
gh one could hear the shouts, laughter, and voices of the mummers.  "Gee up, my d
arlings!" shouted Nicholas, pulling the reins to one side and flourishing the whi
p.  It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by the side 
horses who pulled harderever increasing their gallopthat one noticed how fast the
 troyka was flying. Nicholas looked back. With screams squeals, and waving of whi
ps that caused even the shaft horses to gallopthe other sleighs followed. The sha
ft horse swung steadily beneath the bow over its head, with no thought of slacken
ing pace and ready to put on speed when required.  Nicholas overtook the first sl
eigh. They were driving downhill and coming out upon a broad trodden track across
 a meadow, near a river.  "Where are we?" thought he. "It's the Kosoy meadow, I s
uppose. But nothis is something new I've never seen before. This isn't the Kosoy 
meadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It is something new
 and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be..." And shouting to his horses, he began
 to pass the first sleigh.  Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face, whic
h was already covered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows.  Nicholas gave the horses t
he rein, and Zakhar, stretching out his arms, clucked his tongue and let his hors
es go.  "Now, look out, master!" he cried.  Faster still the two troykas flew sid
e by side, and faster moved the feet of the galloping side horses. Nicholas began
 to draw ahead. Zakhar, while still keeping his arms extended, raised one hand wi
th the reins.  "No you won't, master!" he shouted.  Nicholas put all his horses t
o a gallop and passed Zakhar. The horses showered the fine dry snow on the faces 
of those in the sleighbeside them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught con
fused glimpses of swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were pas
sing. The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girls shri
eking were heard from different sides.  Again checking his horses, Nicholas looke
d around him. They were still surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight a
nd spangled with stars.  "Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left, but 
why to the left?" thought Nicholas. "Are we getting to the Melyukovs'? Is this Me
lyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knows what is happenin
g to usbut it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is." And he looked round i
n the sleigh.  "Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!" said one of the 
strange, pretty, unfamiliar peoplethe one with fine eyebrows and mustache.  "I th
ink this used to be Natasha," thought Nicholas, "and that was Madame Schoss, but 
perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with the mustache I don't know, but I love 
her."  "Aren't you cold?" he asked.  They did not answer but began to laugh. Dimm
ler from the sleigh behind shouted somethingprobably something funnybut they coul
d not make out what he said.  "Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing.  "But h
ere was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and a glitter of diamonds and a
 flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairy buildings and the shrill ye
lls of some animals. And if this is really Melyukovka, it is still stranger that 
we drove heaven knows where and have come to Melyukovka," thought Nicholas.  It r
eally was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with merry faces came running, out to
 the porch carrying candles.  "Who is it?" asked someone in the porch.  "The mumm
ers from the count's. I know by the horses," replied some voices.      CHAPTER XI
   Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova, a broadly built, energetic woman wearing spectac
les, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress, surrounded by her daughters whom s
he was trying to keep from feeling dull. They were quietly dropping melted wax in
to snow and looking at the shadows the wax figures would throw on the wall, when 
they heard the steps and voices of new arrivals in the vestibule.  Hussars, ladie
s, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearing their throats and wiping the hoarfr
ost from their faces in the vestibule, came into the ballroom where candles were 
hurriedly lighted. The clownDimmlerand the ladyNicholasstarted a dance. Surrounde
d by the screaming children the mummers, covering their faces and disguising thei
r voices, bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about the room.  "Dear m
e! there's no recognizing them! And Natasha! See whom she looks like! She really 
reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmlerisn't he good! I didn't know him! And how
 he dances. Dear me, there's a Circassian. Really, how becoming it is to dear Son
ya. And who is that? Well, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanyaclear away the
 tables! And we were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The hussar, the hussar! J
ust like a boy! And the legs!... I can't look at him..." different voices were sa
ying.  Natasha, the young Melyukovs' favorite, disappeared with them into the bac
k rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garments were called for
 and received from the footman by bare girlish arms from behind the door. Ten min
utes later, all the young Melyukovs joined the mummers.  Pelageya Danilovna, havi
ng given orders to clear the rooms for the visitors and arranged about refreshmen
ts for the gentry and the serfs, went about among the mummers without removing he
r spectacles, peering into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to rec
ognize any of them. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recog
nize, she did not even recognize her own daughters, or her late husband's, dressi
ng gowns and uniforms, which they had put on.  "And who is this?" she asked her g
overness, peering into the face of her own daughter dressed up as a KazanTartar. 
"I suppose it is one of the Rostovs! Well, Mr. Hussar, and what regiment do you s
erve in?" she asked Natasha. "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she order
ed the butler who was handing things round. "That's not forbidden by his law."  S
ometimes, as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut by the dancers, who
having decided once for all that being disguised, no one would recognize themwere
 not at all shy, Pelageya Danilovna hid her face in her handkerchief, and her who
le stout body shook with irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter.  "My little Sas
ha! Look at Sasha!" she said.  After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pe
lageya Danilovna made the serfs and gentry join in one large circle a ring, a str
ing, and a silver ruble were fetched and they all played games together.  In an h
our, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The corked eyebrows and musta
ches were smeared over the perspiring, flushed, and merry faces. Pelageya Danilov
na began to recognize the mummers, admired their cleverly contrived costumes, and
 particularly how they suited the young ladies, and she thanked them all for havi
ng entertained her so well. The visitors were invited to supper in the drawing ro
om, and the serfs had something served to them in the ballroom.  "Now to tell one
's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening!" said an old maid who lived wit
h the Melyukovs, during supper.  "Why?" said the eldest Melyukov girl.  "You woul
dn't go, it takes courage..."  "I'll go," said Sonya.  "Tell what happened to the
 young lady!" said the second Melyukov girl.  "Well," began the old maid, "a youn
g lady once went out, took a cock, laid the table for two, all properly, and sat 
down. After sitting a while, she suddenly hears someone coming... a sleigh drives
 up with harness bells she hears him coming! He comes in, just in the shape of a 
man, like an officercomes in and sits down to table with her."  "Ah! ah!" screame
d Natasha, rolling her eyes with horror.  "Yes? And how... did he speak?"  "Yes, 
like a man. Everything quite all right, and he began persuading her and she shoul
d have kept him talking till cockcrow, but she got frightened, just got frightene
d and hid her face in her hands. Then he caught her up. It was lucky the maids ra
n in just then..."  "Now, why frighten them?" said Pelageya Danilovna.  "Mamma, y
ou used to try your fate yourself..." said her daughter.  "And how does one do it
 in a barn?" inquired Sonya.  "Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. 
It depends on what you hear hammering and knockingthat's bad but a sound of shift
ing grain is good and one sometimes hears that, too."  "Mamma, tell us what happe
ned to you in the barn."  Pelageya Danilovna smiled.  "Oh, I've forgotten..." she
 replied. "But none of you would go?"  "Yes, I will Pelageya Danilovna, let me! I
'll go," said Sonya.  "Well, why not, if you're not afraid?"  "Louisa Ivanovna, m
ay I?" asked Sonya.  Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ru
ble game or talking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and gazed at her
 with quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today, thanks to that bur
ntcork mustache, that he had fully learned to know her. And really, that evening,
 Sonya was brighter, more animated, and prettier than Nicholas had ever seen her 
before.  "So that's what she is like what a fool I have been!" he thought gazing 
at her sparkling eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturous smile dimpled her
 cheeks, a smile he had never seen before.  "I'm not afraid of anything," said So
nya. "May I go at once?" She got up.  They told her where the barn was and how sh
e should stand and listen, and they handed her a fur cloak. She threw this over h
er head and shoulders and glanced at Nicholas.  "What a darling that girl is!" th
ought he. "And what have I been thinking of till now?"  Sonya went out into the p
assage to go to the barn. Nicholas went hastily to the front porch, saying he fel
t too hot. The crowd of people really had made the house stuffy.  Outside, there 
was the same cold stillness and the same moon, but even brighter than before. The
 light was so strong and the snow sparkled with so many stars that one did not wi
sh to look up at the sky and the real stars were unnoticed. The sky was black and
 dreary, while the earth was gay.  "I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waiting
 for?" thought Nicholas, and running out from the porch he went round the corner 
of the house and along the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sonya would p
ass that way. Halfway lay some snowcovered piles of firewood and across and along
 them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on the snow and on t
he path. This path led to the barn. The log walls of the barn and its snowcovered
 roof, that looked as if hewn out of some precious stone, sparkled in the moonlig
ht. A tree in the garden snapped with the frost, and then all was again perfectly
 silent. His bosom seemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and
 gladness.  From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps, the 
bottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and he heard the voic
e of an old maidservant saying, "Straight, straight, along the path, Miss. Only, 
don't look back."  "I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and along the path 
toward Nicholas came the crunching, whistling sound of Sonya's feet in her thin s
hoes.  Sonya came along, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple of paces awa
y when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholas she had known and alwa
ys slightly feared. He was in a woman's dress, with tousled hair and a happy smil
e new to Sonya. She ran rapidly toward him.  "Quite different and yet the same," 
thought Nicholas, looking at her face all lit up by the moonlight. He slipped his
 arms under the cloak that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, an
d kissed her on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork. Sony
a kissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her little hands pressed them to h
is cheeks.  "Sonya!... Nicholas!"... was all they said. They ran to the barn and 
then back again, reentering, he by the front and she by the back porch.      CHAP
TER XII   When they all drove back from Pelageya Danilovna's, Natasha, who always
 saw and noticed everything, arranged that she and Madame Schoss should go back i
n the sleigh with Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas and the maids.  On the way bac
k Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing and kept peering by that fant
astic alltransforming light into Sonya's face and searching beneath the eyebrows 
and mustache for his former and his present Sonya from whom he had resolved never
 to be parted again. He looked and recognizing in her both the old and the new So
nya, and being reminded by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of her kiss, 
inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and, looking at the ground flying benea
th him and at the sparkling sky, felt himself again in fairyland.  "Sonya, is it 
well with thee?" he asked from time to time.  "Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?
"  When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran for a mome
nt to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing.  "Natasha!" he whispered in French,
 "do you know I have made up my mind about Sonya?"  "Have you told her?" asked Na
tasha, suddenly beaming all over with joy.  "Oh, how strange you are with that mu
stache and those eyebrows!... Natashaare you glad?"  "I am so glad, so glad! I wa
s beginning to be vexed with you. I did not tell you, but you have been treating 
her badly. What a heart she has, Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was asham
ed to be happy while Sonya was not," continued Natasha. "Now I am so glad! Well, 
run back to her."  "No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!" cried Nicholas, p
eering into her face and finding in his sister too something new, unusual, and be
witchingly tender that he had not seen in her before. "Natasha, it's magical, isn
't it?"  "Yes," she replied. "You have done splendidly."  "Had I seen her before 
as she is now," thought Nicholas, "I should long ago have asked her what to do an
d have done whatever she told me, and all would have been well."  "So you are gla
d and I have done right?"  "Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time
 ago about it. Mamma said she was angling for you. How could she say such a thing
! I nearly stormed at Mamma. I will never let anyone say anything bad of Sonya, f
or there is nothing but good in her."  "Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, agai
n scrutinizing the expression of his sister's face to see if she was in earnest. 
Then he jumped down and, his boots scrunching the snow, ran back to his sleigh. T
he same happy, smiling Circassian, with mustache and beaming eyes looking up from
 under a sable hood, was still sitting there, and that Circassian was Sonya, and 
that Sonya was certainly his future happy and loving wife.  When they reached hom
e and had told their mother how they had spent the evening at the Melyukovs', the
 girls went to their bedroom. When they had undressed, but without washing off th
e cork mustaches, they sat a long time talking of their happiness. They talked of
 how they would live when they were married, how their husbands would be friends,
 and how happy they would be. On Natasha's table stood two looking glasses which 
Dunyasha had prepared beforehand.  "Only when will all that be? I am afraid never
.... It would be too good!" said Natasha, rising and going to the looking glasses
.  "Sit down, Natasha perhaps you'll see him," said Sonya.  Natasha lit the candl
es, one on each side of one of the looking glasses, and sat down.  "I see someone
 with a mustache," said Natasha, seeing her own face.  "You mustn't laugh, Miss,"
 said Dunyasha.  With Sonya's help and the maid's, Natasha got the glass she held
 into the right position opposite the other her face assumed a serious expression
 and she sat silent. She sat a long time looking at the receding line of candles 
reflected in the glasses and expecting from tales she had heard to see a coffin, 
or him, Prince Andrew, in that last dim, indistinctly outlined square. But ready 
as she was to take the smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin, she 
saw nothing. She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the looking glasses. 
 "Why is it others see things and I don't?" she said. "You sit down now, Sonya. Y
ou absolutely must, tonight! Do it for me.... Today I feel so frightened!"  Sonya
 sat down before the glasses, got the right position, and began looking.  "Now, M
iss Sonya is sure to see something," whispered Dunyasha "while you do nothing but
 laugh."  Sonya heard this and Natasha's whisper  "I know she will. She saw somet
hing last year."  For about three minutes all were silent.  "Of course she will!"
 whispered Natasha, but did not finish... suddenly Sonya pushed away the glass sh
e was holding and covered her eyes with her hand.  "Oh, Natasha!" she cried.  "Di
d you see? Did you? What was it?" exclaimed Natasha, holding up the looking glass
.  Sonya had not seen anything, she was just wanting to blink and to get up when 
she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did not wish to disappoint eithe
r Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard to sit still. She did not herself know how
 or why the exclamation escaped her when she covered her eyes.  "You saw him?" ur
ged Natasha, seizing her hand.  "Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him," Sonya could no
t help saying, not yet knowing whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andr
ew.  "But why shouldn't I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides who can tel
l whether I saw anything or not?" flashed through Sonya's mind.  "Yes, I saw him,
" she said.  "How? Standing or lying?"  "No, I saw... At first there was nothing,
 then I saw him lying down."  "Andrew lying? Is he ill?" asked Natasha, her frigh
tened eyes fixed on her friend.  "No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His face 
was cheerful, and he turned to me." And when saying this she herself fancied she 
had really seen what she described.  "Well, and then, Sonya?..."  "After that, I 
could not make out what there was something blue and red..."  "Sonya! When will h
e come back? When shall I see him! O, God, how afraid I am for him and for myself
 and about everything!..." Natasha began, and without replying to Sonya's words o
f comfort she got into bed, and long after her candle was out lay openeyed and mo
tionless, gazing at the moonlight through the frosty windowpanes.      CHAPTER XI
II   Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love for S
onya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who had long noticed wha
t was going on between them and was expecting this declaration, listened to him i
n silence and then told her son that he might marry whom he pleased, but that nei
ther she nor his father would give their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, f
or the first time, felt that his mother was displeased with him and that, despite
 her love for him, she would not give way. Coldly, without looking at her son, sh
e sent for her husband and, when he came, tried briefly and coldly to inform him 
of the facts, in her son's presence, but unable to restrain herself she burst int
o tears of vexation and left the room. The old count began irresolutely to admoni
sh Nicholas and beg him to abandon his purpose. Nicholas replied that he could no
t go back on his word, and his father, sighing and evidently disconcerted, very s
oon became silent and went in to the countess. In all his encounters with his son
, the count was always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted th
e family fortune, and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to marry an 
heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya. On this occasion, he was only more vivi
dly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had not been in disorder, no better
 wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have been wished for, and that no one but him
self with his Mitenka and his uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition
 of the family finances.  The father and mother did not speak of the matter to th
eir son again, but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and, with a cruel
ty neither of them expected, reproached her niece for trying to catch Nicholas an
d for ingratitude. Sonya listened silently with downcast eyes to the countess' cr
uel words, without understanding what was required of her. She was ready to sacri
fice everything for her benefactors. Selfsacrifice was her most cherished idea bu
t in this case she could not see what she ought to sacrifice, or for whom. She co
uld not help loving the countess and the whole Rostov family, but neither could s
he help loving Nicholas and knowing that his happiness depended on that love. She
 was silent and sad and did not reply. Nicholas felt the situation to be intolera
ble and went to have an explanation with his mother. He first implored her to for
give him and Sonya and consent to their marriage, then he threatened that if she 
molested Sonya he would at once marry her secretly.  The countess, with a coldnes
s her son had never seen in her before, replied that he was of age, that Prince A
ndrew was marrying without his father's consent, and he could do the same, but th
at she would never receive that intriguer as her daughter.  Exploding at the word
 intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told his mother he had never expected he
r to try to force him to sell his feelings, but if that were so, he would say for
 the last time.... But he had no time to utter the decisive word which the expres
sion of his face caused his mother to await with terror, and which would perhaps 
have forever remained a cruel memory to them both. He had not time to say it, for
 Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered the room from the door at which she h
ad been listening.  "Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be q
uiet, I tell you!..." she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice.  "Mamma darl
ing, it's not at all so... my poor, sweet darling," she said to her mother, who c
onscious that they had been on the brink of a rupture gazed at her son with terro
r, but in the obstinacy and excitement of the conflict could not and would not gi
ve way.  "Nicholas, I'll explain to you. Go away! Listen, Mamma darling," said Na
tasha.  Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which she was
 aiming.  The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter's breast, w
hile Nicholas rose, clutching his head, and left the room.  Natasha set to work t
o effect a reconciliation, and so far succeeded that Nicholas received a promise 
from his mother that Sonya should not be troubled, while he on his side promised 
not to undertake anything without his parents' knowledge.  Firmly resolved, after
 putting his affairs in order in the regiment, to retire from the army and return
 and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious, sorrowful, and at variance with his parents,
 but, as it seemed to him, passionately in love, left at the beginning of January
 to rejoin his regiment.  After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostov household 
were more depressing than ever, and the countess fell ill from mental agitation. 
 Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so on account o
f the hostile tone the countess could not help adopting toward her. The count was
 more perturbed than ever by the condition of his affairs, which called for some 
decisive action. Their town house and estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sol
d, and for this they had to go to Moscow. But the countess' health obliged them t
o delay their departure from day to day.  Natasha, who had borne the first period
 of separation from her betrothed lightly and even cheerfully, now grew more agit
ated and impatient every day. The thought that her best days, which she would hav
e employed in loving him, were being vainly wasted, with no advantage to anyone, 
tormented her incessantly. His letters for the most part irritated her. It hurt h
er to think that while she lived only in the thought of him, he was living a real
 life, seeing new places and new people that interested him. The more interesting
 his letters were the more vexed she felt. Her letters to him, far from giving he
r any comfort, seemed to her a wearisome and artificial obligation. She could not
 write, because she could not conceive the possibility of expressing sincerely in
 a letter even a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice, smile, and glanc
e. She wrote to him formal, monotonous, and dry letters, to which she attached no
 importance herself, and in the rough copies of which the countess corrected her 
mistakes in spelling.  There was still no improvement in the countess' health, bu
t it was impossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer. Natasha's troussea
u had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrew was expected in M
oscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spending the winter, and Natasha felt sure 
he had already arrived.  So the countess remained in the country, and the count, 
taking Sonya and Natasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.      BOO
K EIGHT 1811  12      CHAPTER I   After Prince Andrews engagement to Natasha, Pie
rre without any apparent cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as bef
ore. Firmly convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor, 
and happy as he had been in perfecting his inner man, to which he had devoted him
self with such ardorall the zest of such a life vanished after the engagement of 
Andrew and Natasha and the death of Joseph Alexeevich, the news of which reached 
him almost at the same time. Only the skeleton of life remained his house, a bril
liant wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very important personage, acquaintance
 with all Petersburg, and his court service with its dull formalities. And this l
ife suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keeping a diary, 
avoided the company of the Brothers, began going to the Club again, drank a great
 deal, and came once more in touch with the bachelor sets, leading such a life th
at the Countess Helene thought it necessary to speak severely to him about it. Pi
erre felt that she was right, and to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow. 
 In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the faded and fading pri
ncesses still lived, with its enormous retinue as soon as, driving through the to
wn, he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable tapers burning before the golden c
overs of the icons, the Kremlin Square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the
 sleigh drivers and hovels of the Sivtsev Vrazhok, those old Moscovites who desir
ed nothing, hurried nowhere, and were ending their days leisurely when he saw tho
se old Moscow ladies, the Moscow balls, and the English Club, he felt himself at 
home in a quiet haven. In Moscow he felt at peace, at home, warm and dirty as in 
an old dressing gown.  Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, r
eceived Pierre like a longexpected guest whose place was always ready awaiting hi
m. For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest, most intellectual, merriest
, and most magnanimous of cranks, a heedless, genial nobleman of the old Russian 
type. His purse was always empty because it was open to everyone.  Benefit perfor
mances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies, gypsy choirs, schools, subs
cription dinners, sprees, Freemasons, churches, and booksno one and nothing met w
ith a refusal from him, and had it not been for two friends who had borrowed larg
e sums from him and taken him under their protection, he would have given everyth
ing away. There was never a dinner or soiree at the Club without him. As soon as 
he sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux he was surrounded
, and talking, disputing, and joking began. When there were quarrels, his kindly 
smile and welltimed jests reconciled the antagonists. The Masonic dinners were du
ll and dreary when he was not there.  When after a bachelor supper he rose with h
is amiable and kindly smile, yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to
 drive off somewhere with them, shouts of delight and triumph arose among the you
ng men. At balls he danced if a partner was needed. Young ladies, married and unm
arried, liked him because without making love to any of them, he was equally amia
ble to all, especially after supper. "Il est charmant il n'a pas de sexe," * they
 said of him.       * "He is charming he has no sex."   Pierre was one of those r
etired gentlemeninwaiting of whom there were hundreds goodhumoredly ending their 
days in Moscow.  How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he fir
st arrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him to seek o
r plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternally predetermined, and 
that wriggle as he might, he would be what all in his position were. He could not
 have believed it! Had he not at one time longed with all his heart to establish 
a republic in Russia then himself to be a Napoleon then to be a philosopher and t
hen a strategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen the possibility o
f, and passionately desired, the regeneration of the sinful human race, and his o
wn progress to the highest degree of perfection? Had he not established schools a
nd hospitals and liberated his serfs?  But instead of all thathere he was, the we
althy husband of an unfaithful wife, a retired gentlemaninwaiting, fond of eating
 and drinking and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusing the government a bi
t, a member of the Moscow English Club, and a universal favorite in Moscow societ
y. For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the idea that he was one of 
those same retired Moscow gentlemeninwaiting he had so despised seven years befor
e.  Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only living this l
ife temporarily but then he was shocked by the thought of how many, like himself,
 had entered that life and that Club temporarily, with all their teeth and hair, 
and had only left it when not a single tooth or hair remained.  In moments of pri
de, when he thought of his position it seemed to him that he was quite different 
and distinct from those other retired gentlemeninwaiting he had formerly despised
 they were empty, stupid, contented fellows, satisfied with their position, "whil
e I am still discontented and want to do something for mankind. But perhaps all t
hese comrades of mine struggled just like me and sought something new, a path in 
life of their own, and like me were brought by force of circumstances, society, a
nd raceby that elemental force against which man is powerlessto the condition I a
m in," said he to himself in moments of humility and after living some time in Mo
scow he no longer despised, but began to grow fond of, to respect, and to pity hi
s comrades in destiny, as he pitied himself.  Pierre no longer suffered moments o
f despair, hypochondria, and disgust with life, but the malady that had formerly 
found expression in such acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for 
a moment. "What for? Why? What is going on in the world?" he would ask himself in
 perplexity several times a day, involuntarily beginning to reflect anew on the m
eaning of the phenomena of life but knowing by experience that there were no answ
ers to these questions he made haste to turn away from them, and took up a book, 
or hurried of to the Club or to Apollon Nikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of 
the town.  "Helene, who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one 
of the stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regarded by people as t
he acme of intelligence and refinement, and they pay homage to her. Napoleon Bona
parte was despised by all as long as he was great, but now that he has become a w
retched comedian the Emperor Francis wants to offer him his daughter in an illega
l marriage. The Spaniards, through the Catholic clergy, offer praise to God for t
heir victory over the French on the fourteenth of June, and the French, also thro
ugh the Catholic clergy, offer praise because on that same fourteenth of June the
y defeated the Spaniards. My brother Masons swear by the blood that they are read
y to sacrifice everything for their neighbor, but they do not give a ruble each t
o the collections for the poor, and they intrigue, the Astraea Lodge against the 
Manna Seekers, and fuss about an authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobod
y needs, and the meaning of which the very man who wrote it does not understand. 
We all profess the Christian law of forgiveness of injuries and love of our neigh
bors, the law in honor of which we have built in Moscow forty times forty churche
sbut yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister of that same law of
 love and forgiveness, a priest, gave the soldier a cross to kiss before his exec
ution." So thought Pierre, and the whole of this general deception which everyone
 accepts, accustomed as he was to it, astonished him each time as if it were some
thing new. "I understand the deception and confusion," he thought, "but how am I 
to tell them all that I see? I have tried, and have always found that they too in
 the depths of their souls understand it as I do, and only try not to see it. So 
it appears that it must be so! But Iwhat is to become of me?" thought he. He had 
the unfortunate capacity many men, especially Russians, have of seeing and believ
ing in the possibility of goodness and truth, but of seeing the evil and falsehoo
d of life too clearly to be able to take a serious part in it. Every sphere of wo
rk was connected, in his eyes, with evil and deception. Whatever he tried to be, 
whatever he engaged in, the evil and falsehood of it repulsed him and blocked eve
ry path of activity. Yet he had to live and to find occupation. It was too dreadf
ul to be under the burden of these insoluble problems, so he abandoned himself to
 any distraction in order to forget them. He frequented every kind of society, dr
ank much, bought pictures, engaged in building, and above allread.  He read, and 
read everything that came to hand. On coming home, while his valets were still ta
king off his things, he picked up a book and began to read. From reading he passe
d to sleeping, from sleeping to gossip in drawing rooms of the Club, from gossip 
to carousals and women from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine. Drinking
 became more and more a physical and also a moral necessity. Though the doctors w
arned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous for him, he drank a great d
eal. He was only quite at ease when having poured several glasses of wine mechani
cally into his large mouth he felt a pleasant warmth in his body, an amiability t
oward all his fellows, and a readiness to respond superficially to every idea wit
hout probing it deeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly tha
t the terribly tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him was not a
s dreadful as he had thought. He was always conscious of some aspect of that skei
n, as with a buzzing in his head after dinner or supper he chatted or listened to
 conversation or read. But under the influence of wine he said to himself "It doe
sn't matter. I'll get it unraveled. I have a solution ready, but have no time now
I'll think it all out later on!" But the later on never came.  In the morning, on
 an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared as insoluble and terrible as ev
er, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, and if anyone came to see him he was gla
d.  Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war when entrenched
 under the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, try hard to find some occupa
tion the more easily to bear the danger. To Pierre all men seemed like those sold
iers, seeking refuge from life some in ambition, some in cards, some in framing l
aws, some in women, some in toys, some in horses, some in politics, some in sport
, some in wine, and some in governmental affairs. "Nothing is trivial, and nothin
g is important, it's all the sameonly to save oneself from it as best one can," t
hought Pierre. "Only not to see it, that dreadful it!"      CHAPTER II   At the b
eginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughter moved to Moscow. At
 that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander's regime had weakened and a patri
otic and antiFrench tendency prevailed there, and this, together with his past an
d his intellect and his originality, at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an ob
ject of particular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow opposit
ion to the government.  The prince had aged very much that year. He showed marked
 signs of senility by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recent ev
ents, remembrance of remote ones, and the childish vanity with which he accepted 
the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of this the old man inspired 
in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectful venerationespecially of an even
ing when he came in to tea in his oldfashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused
 by anyone, told his abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and s
cathing criticisms of the present. For them all, that oldfashioned house with its
 gigantic mirrors, preRevolution furniture, powdered footmen, and the stern shrew
d old man himself a relic of the past century with his gentle daughter and the pr
etty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted to him presented a majestic and agre
eable spectacle. But the visitors did not reflect that besides the couple of hour
s during which they saw their host, there were also twentytwo hours in the day du
ring which the private and intimate life of the house continued.  Latterly that p
rivate life had become very trying for Princess Mary. There in Moscow she was dep
rived of her greatest pleasurestalks with the pilgrims and the solitude which ref
reshed her at Bald Hillsand she had none of the advantages and pleasures of city 
life. She did not go out into society everyone knew that her father would not let
 her go anywhere without him, and his failing health prevented his going out hims
elf, so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties. She had quite ab
andoned the hope of getting married. She saw the coldness and malevolence with wh
ich the old prince received and dismissed the young men, possible suitors, who so
metimes appeared at their house. She had no friends during this visit to Moscow s
he had been disappointed in the two who had been nearest to her. Mademoiselle Bou
rienne, with whom she had never been able to be quite frank, had now become unple
asant to her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whom
 she had corresponded for the last five years, was in Moscow, but proved to be qu
ite alien to her when they met. Just then Julie, who by the death of her brothers
 had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow, was in the full whirl of soci
ety pleasures. She was surrounded by young men who, she fancied, had suddenly lea
rned to appreciate her worth. Julie was at that stage in the life of a society wo
man when she feels that her last chance of marrying has come and that her fate mu
st be decided now or never. On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a mournful
 smile that she now had no one to write to, since Juliewhose presence gave her no
 pleasure was here and they met every week. Like the old emigre who declined to m
arry the lady with whom he had spent his evenings for years, she regretted Julie'
s presence and having no one to write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to t
alk to, no one to whom to confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot jus
t then. The time for Prince Andrew's return and marriage was approaching, but his
 request to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out in fact, it
 seemed as if matters were quite hopeless, for at every mention of the young Coun
tess Rostova the old prince who apart from that was usually in a bad temper lost 
control of himself. Another lately added sorrow arose from the lessons she gave h
er six yearold nephew. To her consternation she detected in herself in relation t
o little Nicholas some symptoms of her father's irritability. However often she t
old herself that she must not get irritable when teaching her nephew, almost ever
y time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show him the French alphabet, she s
o longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and easily into the childwho was alrea
dy afraid that Auntie might at any moment get angrythat at his slightest inattent
ion she trembled, became flustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pu
lled him by the arm and put him in the corner. Having put him in the corner she w
ould herself begin to cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas, follo
wing her example, would sob, and without permission would leave his corner, come 
to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort her. But what distressed th
e princess most of all was her father's irritability, which was always directed a
gainst her and had of late amounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate he
rself to the ground all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water,
 it would never have entered her mind to think her position hard but this loving 
despotthe more cruel because he loved her and for that reason tormented himself a
nd herknew how not merely to hurt and humiliate her deliberately, but to show her
 that she was always to blame for everything. Of late he had exhibited a new trai
t that tormented Princess Mary more than anything else this was his everincreasin
g intimacy with Mademoiselle Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment of rece
iving the news of his son's intentions had occurred to him in jestthat if Andrew 
got married he himself would marry Bouriennehad evidently pleased him, and latter
ly he had persistently, and as it seemed to Princess Mary merely to offend her, s
hown special endearments to the companion and expressed his dissatisfaction with 
his daughter by demonstrations of love of Bourienne.  One day in Moscow in Prince
ss Mary's presence she thought her father did it purposely when she was there the
 old prince kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand and, drawing her to him, embrace
d her affectionately. Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room. A few minute
s later Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's room smiling and making 
cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princess Mary hastily wiped away her tea
rs, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, and evidently unconscious of wh
at she was doing began shouting in angry haste at the Frenchwoman, her voice brea
king "It's horrible, vile, inhuman, to take advantage of the weakness..." She did
 not finish. "Leave my room," she exclaimed, and burst into sobs.  Next day the p
rince did not say a word to his daughter, but she noticed that at dinner he gave 
orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should be served first. After dinner, when the
 footman handed coffee and from habit began with the princess, the prince suddenl
y grew furious, threw his stick at Philip, and instantly gave instructions to hav
e him conscripted for the army.  "He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he do
esn't obey! She is the first person in this house she's my best friend," cried th
e prince. "And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressing Princess
 Mary for the first time, "to forget yourself again before her as you dared to do
 yesterday, I will show you who is master in this house. Go! Don't let me set eye
s on you beg her pardon!"  Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne's pardon, a
nd also her father's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had begge
d for her intervention.  At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gath
ered in her soul. And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for his
 spectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and not seeing them, or would for
get something that had just occurred, or take a false step with his failing legs 
and turn to see if anyone had noticed his feebleness, or, worst of all, at dinner
 when there were no visitors to excite him would suddenly fall asleep, letting hi
s napkin drop and his shaking head sink over his plate. "He is old and feeble, an
d I dare to condemn him!" she thought at such moments, with a feeling of revulsio
n against herself.      CHAPTER III   In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French
 doctorMetivierwho had rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handso
me, amiable as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily cle
ver doctor. He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor, but as an 
equal.  Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly on Mademoisel
le Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him and had grown accustom
ed to him. Metivier came to see the prince about twice a week.  On December 6St. 
Nicholas' Day and the prince's name dayall Moscow came to the prince's front door
 but he gave orders to admit no one and to invite to dinner only a small number, 
a list of whom he gave to Princess Mary.  Metivier, who came in the morning with 
his felicitations, considered it proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la con
signe, * as he told Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened tha
t on that morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods. He ha
d been going about the house all the morning finding fault with everyone and pret
ending not to understand what was said to him and not to be understood himself. P
rincess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbed querulousness, which generally
 culminated in a burst of rage, and she went about all that morning as though fac
ing a cocked and loaded gun and awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the docto
r's arrival the morning had passed off safely. After admitting the doctor, Prince
ss Mary sat down with a book in the drawing room near the door through which she 
could hear all that passed in the study.       * To force the guard.   At first s
he heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, then both voices began speakin
g at the same time, the door was flung open, and on the threshold appeared the ha
ndsome figure of the terrified Metivier with his shock of black hair, and the pri
nce in his dressing gown and fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils of 
his eyes rolled downwards.  "You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do
! French spy, slave of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you..
."  Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne who at t
he sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room.  "The prince is not very 
well bile and rush of blood to the head. Keep calm, I will call again tomorrow," 
said Metivier and putting his fingers to his lips he hastened away.  Through the 
study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry "Spies, traitors, traitor
s everywhere! Not a moment's peace in my own house!"  After Metivier's departure 
the old prince called his daughter in, and the whole weight of his wrath fell on 
her. She was to blame that a spy had been admitted. Had he not told her, yes, tol
d her to make a list, and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why 
was that scoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all. With her, he said, he c
ould not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly.  "No, ma'am! We must pa
rt, we must part! Understand that, understand it! I cannot endure any more," he s
aid, and left the room. Then, as if afraid she might find some means of consolati
on, he returned and trying to appear calm added "And don't imagine I have said th
is in a moment of anger. I am calm. I have thought it over, and it will be carrie
d outwe must part so find some place for yourself...." But he could not restrain 
himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves is capable, evidently 
suffering himself, he shook his fists at her and screamed  "If only some fool wou
ld marry her!" Then he slammed the door, sent for Mademoiselle Bourienne, and sub
sided into his study.  At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner.
  These gueststhe famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin with his nephew, Gener
al Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of the younger generation Pier
re and Boris Drubetskoyawaited the prince in the drawing room.  Boris, who had co
me to Moscow on leave a few days before, had been anxious to be presented to Prin
ce Nicholas Bolkonski, and had contrived to ingratiate himself so well that the o
ld prince in his case made an exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in
 his house.  The prince's house did not belong to what is known as fashionable so
ciety, but his little circlethough not much talked about in townwas one it was mo
re flattering to be received in than any other. Boris had realized this the week 
before when the commander in chief in his presence invited Rostopchin to dinner o
n St. Nicholas' Day, and Rostopchin had replied that he could not come  "On that 
day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski." 
 "Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander in chief. "How is he?..."  The small group
 that assembled before dinner in the lofty oldfashioned drawing room with its old
 furniture resembled the solemn gathering of a court of justice. All were silent 
or talked in low tones. Prince Nicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Ma
ry seemed even quieter and more diffident than usual. The guests were reluctant t
o address her, feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation. Count Rost
opchin alone kept the conversation going, now relating the latest town news, and 
now the latest political gossip.  Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took 
part in the conversation. Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives
 a report, only now and then, silently or by a brief word, showing that he took h
eed of what was being reported to him. The tone of the conversation was such as i
ndicated that no one approved of what was being done in the political world. Inci
dents were related evidently confirming the opinion that everything was going fro
m bad to worse, but whether telling a story or giving an opinion the speaker alwa
ys stopped, or was stopped, at the point beyond which his criticism might touch t
he sovereign himself.  At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news Nap
oleon's seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note, hosti
le to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.  "Bonaparte treat
s Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," said Count Rostopchin, repeating a 
phrase he had uttered several times before. "One only wonders at the longsufferin
g or blindness of the crowned heads. Now the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte d
oesn't scruple to depose the head of the Catholic Churchyet all keep silent! Our 
sovereign alone has protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's terr
itory, and even..." Count Rostopchin paused, feeling that he had reached the limi
t beyond which censure was impossible.  "Other territories have been offered in e
xchange for the Duchy of Oldenburg," said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes 
about as I might move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estate
s."  "The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength of char
acter and resignation," remarked Boris, joining in respectfully.  He said this be
cause on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honor of being presented to t
he Duke. Prince Bolkonski glanced at the young man as if about to say something i
n reply, but changed his mind, evidently considering him too young.  "I have read
 our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprised how badly the Note was
 worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in the casual tone of a man dealing with a su
bject quite familiar to him.  Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment
, not understanding why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note
.  "Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so long as its sub
stance is forcible?"  "My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it s
hould be easy to have a good style," returned Count Rostopchin.  Pierre now under
stood the count's dissatisfaction with the wording of the Note.  "One would have 
thought quill drivers enough had sprung up," remarked the old prince. "There in P
etersburg they are always writingnot notes only but even new laws. My Andrew ther
e has written a whole volume of laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writing
!" and he laughed unnaturally.  There was a momentary pause in the conversation t
he old general cleared his throat to draw attention.  "Did you hear of the last e
vent at the review in Petersburg? The figure cut by the new French ambassador."  
"Eh? Yes, I heard something he said something awkward in His Majesty's presence."
  "His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to the march past," c
ontinued the general, "and it seems the ambassador took no notice and allowed him
self to reply that 'We in France pay no attention to such trifles!' The Emperor d
id not condescend to reply. At the next review, they say, the Emperor did not onc
e deign to address him."  All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor p
ersonally, it was impossible to pass any judgment.  "Impudent fellows!" said the 
prince. "You know Metivier? I turned him out of my house this morning. He was her
e they admitted him in spite of my request that they should let no one in," he we
nt on, glancing angrily at his daughter.  And he narrated his whole conversation 
with the French doctor and the reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy
. Though these reasons were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoin
der.  After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to congratulate the 
old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.  He gave her a cold, angry loo
k and offered her his wrinkled, cleanshaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression o
f his face told her that he had not forgotten the morning's talk, that his decisi
on remained in force, and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of 
it to her now.  When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the
 old men sat together.  Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his view
s on the impending war.  He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous
 so long as we sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into Europe
an affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. "We ought not to
 fight either for or against Austria. Our political interests are all in the East
, and in regard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have an armed frontier and a fi
rm policy, and he will never dare to cross the Russian frontier, as was the case 
in 1807!"  "How can we fight the French, Prince?" said Count Rostopchin. "Can we 
arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at our youths, look at ou
r ladies! The French are our Gods Paris is our Kingdom of Heaven."  He began spea
king louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.  "French dresses, French ideas, F
rench feelings! There now, you turned Metivier out by the scruff of his neck beca
use he is a Frenchman and a scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their kn
ees. I went to a party last night, and there out of five ladies three were Roman 
Catholics and had the Pope's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays. And they t
hemselves sit there nearly naked, like the signboards at our Public Baths if I ma
y say so. Ah, when one looks at our young people, Prince, one would like to take 
Peter the Great's old cudgel out of the museum and belabor them in the Russian wa
y till all the nonsense jumps out of them."  All were silent. The old prince look
ed at Rostopchin with a smile and wagged his head approvingly.  "Well, goodby, yo
ur excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin, getting up with characteristic briskn
ess and holding out his hand to the prince.  "Goodby, my dear fellow.... His word
s are music, I never tire of hearing him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of t
he hand and offering his cheek to be kissed.  Following Rostopchin's example the 
others also rose.      CHAPTER IV   Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old
 men's talk and faultfinding, understood nothing of what she heard she only wonde
red whether the guests had all observed her father's hostile attitude toward her.
 She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilities shown her during
 dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, who was visiting them for the third time already.  P
rincess Mary turned with absentminded questioning look to Pierre, who hat in hand
 and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests to approach her after th
e old prince had gone out and they were left alone in the drawing room.  "May I s
tay a little longer?" he said, letting his stout body sink into an armchair besid
e her.  "Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothing?" her look asked.  Pierre wa
s in an agreeable afterdinner mood. He looked straight before him and smiled quie
tly.  "Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked.  "Who?"  "Drubets
koy."  "No, not long..."  "Do you like him?"  "Yes, he is an agreeable young man.
... Why do you ask me that?" said Princess Mary, still thinking of that morning's
 conversation with her father.  "Because I have noticed that when a young man com
es on leave from Petersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying a
n heiress."  "You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.  "Yes," returned Pierr
e with a smile, "and this young man now manages matters so that where there is a 
wealthy heiress there he is too. I can read him like a book. At present he is hes
itating whom to lay siege toyou or Mademoiselle Julie Karagina. He is very attent
ive to her."  "He visits them?"  "Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of
 courting?" said Pierre with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of 
good humored raillery for which he so often reproached himself in his diary.  "No
," replied Princess Mary.  "To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melanch
oly. He is very melancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre.  "Really?" a
sked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face and still thinking of her o
wn sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought she, "if I ventured to confide what I 
am feeling to someone. I should like to tell everything to Pierre. He is kind and
 generous. It would be a relief. He would give me advice."  "Would you marry him?
"  "Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!" she cried s
uddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice. "Ah, how bitter it is to
 love someone near to you and to feel that..." she went on in a trembling voice, 
"that you can do nothing for him but grieve him, and to know that you cannot alte
r this. Then there is only one thing leftto go away, but where could I go?"  "Wha
t is wrong? What is it, Princess?"  But without finishing what she was saying, Pr
incess Mary burst into tears.  "I don't know what is the matter with me today. Do
n't take any noticeforget what I have said!"  Pierre's gaiety vanished completely
. He anxiously questioned the princess, asked her to speak out fully and confide 
her grief to him but she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had
 said, that she did not remember what she had said, and that she had no trouble e
xcept the one he knew ofthat Prince Andrew's marriage threatened to cause a ruptu
re between father and son.  "Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to cha
nge the subject. "I was told they are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew any
 day. I should like them to meet here."  "And how does he now regard the matter?"
 asked Pierre, referring to the old prince.  Princess Mary shook her head.  "What
 is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. The thing is impossible. I o
nly wish I could spare my brother the first moments. I wish they would come soone
r. I hope to be friends with her. You have known them a long time," said Princess
 Mary. "Tell me honestly the whole truth what sort of girl is she, and what do yo
u think of her?The real truth, because you know Andrew is risking so much doing t
his against his father's will that I should like to know..."  An undefined instin
ct told Pierre that these explanations, and repeated requests to be told the whol
e truth, expressed illwill on the princess' part toward her future sisterinlaw an
d a wish that he should disapprove of Andrew's choice but in reply he said what h
e felt rather than what he thought.  "I don't know how to answer your question," 
he said, blushing without knowing why. "I really don't know what sort of girl she
 is I can't analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I don't 
know. That is all one can say about her."  Princess Mary sighed, and the expressi
on on her face said "Yes, that's what I expected and feared."  "Is she clever?" s
he asked.  Pierre considered.  "I think not," he said, "and yetyes. She does not 
deign to be clever.... Oh no, she is simply enchanting, and that is all."  Prince
ss Mary again shook her head disapprovingly.  "Ah, I so long to like her! Tell he
r so if you see her before I do."  "I hear they are expected very soon," said Pie
rre.  Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her future si
sterinlaw as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to accustom the old prince to
 her.      CHAPTER V   Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Peter
sburg, so with the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered betwee
n the two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Though Princess Mary despit
e her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie, he, without knowing why
, felt awkward about paying court to her. When they had last met on the old princ
e's name day, she had answered at random all his attempts to talk sentimentally, 
evidently not listening to what he was saying.  Julie on the contrary accepted hi
s attentions readily, though in a manner peculiar to herself.  She was twentyseve
n. After the death of her brothers she had become very wealthy. She was by now de
cidedly plain, but thought herself not merely as goodlooking as before but even f
ar more attractive. She was confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had b
ecome a very wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the les
s dangerous she became to men, and the more freely they could associate with her 
and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, and the animated company that assem
bled at her house, without incurring any obligation. A man who would have been af
raid ten years before of going every day to the house when there was a girl of se
venteen there, for fear of compromising her and committing himself, would now go 
boldly every day and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a sexless acquai
ntance.  That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable and hospitable in
 Moscow. In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties, a large company, c
hiefly of men, gathered there every day, supping at midnight and staying till thr
ee in the morning. Julie never missed a ball, a promenade, or a play. Her dresses
 were always of the latest fashion. But in spite of that she seemed to be disillu
sioned about everything and told everyone that she did not believe either in frie
ndship or in love, or any of the joys of life, and expected peace only "yonder." 
She adopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment, like a girl 
who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived by him. Though not
hing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded in that light, and had even
 herself come to believe that she had suffered much in life. This melancholy, whi
ch did not prevent her amusing herself, did not hinder the young people who came 
to her house from passing the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the hous
e paid his tribute to the melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused himself
 with society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and bouts rimes, which were in
 vogue at the Karagins'. Only a few of these young men, among them Boris, entered
 more deeply into Julie's melancholy, and with these she had prolonged conversati
ons in private on the vanity of all worldly things, and to them she showed her al
bums filled with mournful sketches, maxims, and verses.  To Boris, Julie was part
icularly gracious she regretted his early disillusionment with life, offered him 
such consolation of friendship as she who had herself suffered so much could rend
er, and showed him her album. Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote "Ru
stic trees, your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me."  On another pa
ge he drew a tomb, and wrote      La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquill
e.     Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile. *       * Death gives 
relief and death is peaceful.   Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.  Jul
ie said this was charming  "There is something so enchanting in the smile of mela
ncholy," she said to Boris, repeating word for word a passage she had copied from
 a book. "It is a ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadness and despa
ir, showing the possibility of consolation."  In reply Boris wrote these lines   
   Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible,     Toi, sans qui le bonheur me ser
ait impossible,     Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler,     Viens calmer l
es tourments de ma sombre retraite,     Et mele une douceur secrete     A ces ple
urs que je sens couler. *         *Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul,
      Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,      Tender melanc
holy, ah, come to console me,      Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat
,      And mingle a secret sweetness      With these tears that I feel to be flow
ing.   For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Boris read Poo
r Liza aloud to her, and more than once interrupted the reading because of the em
otions that choked him. Meeting at large gatherings Julie and Boris looked on one
 another as the only souls who understood one another in a world of indifferent p
eople.  Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playing cards wit
h the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry she was to have two estat
es in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests. Anna Mikhaylovna regarded the refined sad
ness that united her son to the wealthy Julie with emotion, and resignation to th
e Divine will.  "You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said
 to the daughter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. He has suffere
d so many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she to the mother. "Ah, my d
ear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown of Julie latterly," she said to her s
on. "But who could help loving her? She is an angelic being! Ah, Boris, Boris!"sh
e paused. "And how I pity her mother," she went on "today she showed me her accou
nts and letters from Penza they have enormous estates there, and she, poor thing,
 has no one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"  Boris smiled almost impercep
tibly while listening to his mother. He laughed blandly at her naive diplomacy bu
t listened to what she had to say, and sometimes questioned her carefully about t
he Penza and Nizhegorod estates.  Julie had long been expecting a proposal from h
er melancholy adorer and was ready to accept it but some secret feeling of repuls
ion for her, for her passionate desire to get married, for her artificiality, and
 a feeling of horror at renouncing the possibility of real love still restrained 
Boris. His leave was expiring. He spent every day and whole days at the Karagins'
, and every day on thinking the matter over told himself that he would propose to
morrow. But in Julie's presence, looking at her red face and chin nearly always p
owdered, her moist eyes, and her expression of continual readiness to pass at onc
e from melancholy to an unnatural rapture of married bliss, Boris could not utter
 the decisive words, though in imagination he had long regarded himself as the po
ssessor of those Penza and Nizhegorod estates and had apportioned the use of the 
income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, and sometimes the thought occurred
 to her that she was repulsive to him, but her feminine selfdeception immediately
 supplied her with consolation, and she told herself that he was only shy from lo
ve. Her melancholy, however, began to turn to irritability, and not long before B
oris' departure she formed a definite plan of action. Just as Boris' leave of abs
ence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appearance in Moscow, and of course i
n the Karagins' drawing room, and Julie, suddenly abandoning her melancholy, beca
me cheerful and very attentive to Kuragin.  "My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to h
er son, "I know from a reliable source that Prince Vasili has sent his son to Mos
cow to get him married to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for
 her. What do you think of it, my dear?"  The idea of being made a fool of and of
 having thrown away that whole month of arduous melancholy service to Julie, and 
of seeing all the revenue from the Penza estates which he had already mentally ap
portioned and put to proper use fall into the hands of another, and especially in
to the hands of that idiot Anatole, pained Boris. He drove to the Karagins' with 
the firm intention of proposing. Julie met him in a gay, careless manner, spoke c
asually of how she had enjoyed yesterday's ball, and asked when he was leaving. T
hough Boris had come intentionally to speak of his love and therefore meant to be
 tender, he began speaking irritably of feminine inconstancy, of how easily women
 can turn from sadness to joy, and how their moods depend solely on who happens t
o be paying court to them. Julie was offended and replied that it was true that a
 woman needs variety, and the same thing over and over again would weary anyone. 
 "Then I should advise you..." Boris began, wishing to sting her but at that inst
ant the galling thought occurred to him that he might have to leave Moscow withou
t having accomplished his aim, and have vainly wasted his effortswhich was a thin
g he never allowed to happen.  He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, 
lowered his eyes to avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, 
and said  "I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."  H
e glanced at her to make sure that he might go on. Her irritability had suddenly 
quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were fixed on him with greedy exp
ectation. "I can always arrange so as not to see her often," thought Boris. "The 
affair has been begun and must be finished!" He blushed hotly, raised his eyes to
 hers, and said  "You know my feelings for you!"  There was no need to say more J
ulie's face shone with triumph and selfsatisfaction but she forced Boris to say a
ll that is said on such occasionsthat he loved her and had never loved any other 
woman more than her. She knew that for the Penza estates and Nizhegorod forests s
he could demand this, and she received what she demanded.  The affianced couple, 
no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom and melancholy upon them, planned the
 arrangements of a splendid house in Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everyth
ing for a brilliant wedding.      CHAPTER VI   At the end of January old Count Ro
stov went to Moscow with Natasha and Sonya. The countess was still unwell and una
ble to travel but it was impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was e
xpected in Moscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate near Mo
scow had to be sold, besides which the opportunity of presenting his future daugh
terinlaw to old Prince Bolkonski while he was in Moscow could not be missed. The 
Rostovs' Moscow house had not been heated that winter and, as they had come only 
for a short time and the countess was not with them, the count decided to stay wi
th Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who had long been pressing her hospitality on th
em.  Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs drove into Marya Dmitrievna's cou
rtyard in the old Konyusheny street. Marya Dmitrievna lived alone. She had alread
y married off her daughter, and her sons were all in the service.  She held herse
lf as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly, loudly, and bluntly as ever, 
and her whole bearing seemed a reproach to others for any weakness, passion, or t
emptationthe possibility of which she did not admit. From early in the morning, w
earing a dressing jacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she dro
ve out on holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons on affai
rs of which she never spoke to anyone. On ordinary days, after dressing, she rece
ived petitioners of various classes, of whom there were always some. Then she had
 dinner, a substantial and appetizing meal at which there were always three or fo
ur guests after dinner she played a game of boston, and at night she had the news
papers or a new book read to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception 
and went out to pay visits, and then only to the most important persons in the to
wn.  She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostovs arrived and the pulley of the h
all door squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rostovs and their servants. Mary
a Dmitrievna, with her spectacles hanging down on her nose and her head flung bac
k, stood in the hall doorway looking with a stern, grim face at the new arrivals.
 One might have thought she was angry with the travelers and would immediately tu
rn them out, had she not at the same time been giving careful instructions to the
 servants for the accommodation of the visitors and their belongings.  "The count
's things? Bring them here," she said, pointing to the portmanteaus and not greet
ing anyone. "The young ladies'? There to the left. Now what are you dawdling for?
" she cried to the maids. "Get the samovar ready!... You've grown plumper and pre
ttier," she remarked, drawing Natasha whose cheeks were glowing from the cold to 
her by the hood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take off your things, quick!" she shoute
d to the count who was going to kiss her hand. "You're half frozen, I'm sure! Bri
ng some rum for tea!... Bonjour, Sonya dear!" she added, turning to Sonya and ind
icating by this French greeting her slightly contemptuous though affectionate att
itude toward her.  When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor thing
s and tidied themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna kissed them all 
in due order.  "I'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It was h
igh time," she said, giving Natasha a significant look. "The old man is here and 
his son's expected any day. You'll have to make his acquaintance. But we'll speak
 of that later on," she added, glancing at Sonya with a look that showed she did 
not want to speak of it in her presence. "Now listen," she said to the count. "Wh
at do you want tomorrow? Whom will you send for? Shinshin?" she crooked one of he
r fingers. "The sniveling Anna Mikhaylovna? That's two. She's here with her son. 
The son is getting married! Then Bezukhov, eh? He is here too, with his wife. He 
ran away from her and she came galloping after him. He dined with me on Wednesday
. As for them"and she pointed to the girls"tomorrow I'll take them first to the I
berian shrine of the Mother of God, and then we'll drive to the SuperRogue's. I s
uppose you'll have everything new. Don't judge by me sleeves nowadays are this si
ze! The other day young Princess Irina Vasilevna came to see me she was an awful 
sightlooked as if she had put two barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes 
now without some new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" she asked the
 count sternly.  "One thing has come on top of another her rags to buy, and now a
 purchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If you will be 
so kind, I'll fix a time and go down to the estate just for a day, and leave my l
assies with you."  "All right. All right. They'll be safe with me, as safe as in 
Chancery! I'll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pet them a bit
," said Marya Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter and favorite, Natasha, on the 
cheek with her large hand.  Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies t
o the Iberian shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame SuppertRoguet, who was so
 afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at a loss merel
y to get rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the whole trousseau. When th
ey got home she turned everybody out of the room except Natasha, and then called 
her pet to her armchair.  "Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on your betro
thed. You've hooked a fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've known him sin
ce he was so high." She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground. Natasha b
lushed happily. "I like him and all his family. Now listen! You know that old Pri
nce Nicholas much dislikes his son's marrying. The old fellow's crotchety! Of cou
rse Prince Andrew is not a child and can shift without him, but it's not nice to 
enter a family against a father's will. One wants to do it peacefully and lovingl
y. You're a clever girl and you'll know how to manage. Be kind, and use your wits
. Then all will be well."  Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna
 supposed, but really because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her
 love of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairs that 
no one could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, he loved her only, 
and was to come one of these days and take her. She wanted nothing more.  "You se
e I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, your future sisterinlaw.
 'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters,' but this one wouldn't hurt a fly. She has
 asked me to bring you two together. Tomorrow you'll go with your father to see h
er. Be very nice and affectionate to her you're younger than she. When he comes, 
he'll find you already know his sister and father and are liked by them. Am I rig
ht or not? Won't that be best?"  "Yes, it will," Natasha answered reluctantly.   
   CHAPTER VII   Next day, by Marya Dmitrievna's advice, Count Rostov took Natash
a to call on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set out cheerfully on t
his visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well remembered the last interview he had 
had with the old prince at the time of the enrollment, when in reply to an invita
tion to dinner he had had to listen to an angry reprimand for not having provided
 his full quota of men. Natasha, on the other hand, having put on her best gown, 
was in the highest spirits. "They can't help liking me," she thought. "Everybody 
always has liked me, and I am so willing to do anything they wish, so ready to be
 fond of himfor being his fatherand of herfor being his sisterthat there is no re
ason for them not to like me..."  They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vo
zdvizhenka and entered the vestibule.  "Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said th
e count, half in jest, half in earnest but Natasha noticed that her father was fl
urried on entering the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether the princ
e and princess were at home.  When they had been announced a perturbation was not
iceable among the servants. The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped
 by another in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then a maidserva
nt ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioning the princess. At la
st an old, cross looking footman came and announced to the Rostovs that the princ
e was not receiving, but that the princess begged them to walk up. The first pers
on who came to meet the visitors was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the fath
er and daughter with special politeness and showed them to the princess' room. Th
e princess, looking excited and nervous, her face flushed in patches, ran in to m
eet the visitors, treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear cordial and at ea
se. From the first glance Princess Mary did not like Natasha. She thought her too
 fashionably dressed, frivolously gay and vain. She did not at all realize that b
efore having seen her future sisterinlaw she was prejudiced against her by involu
ntary envy of her beauty, youth, and happiness, as well as by jealousy of her bro
ther's love for her. Apart from this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess Mary 
was agitated just then because on the Rostovs' being announced, the old prince ha
d shouted that he did not wish to see them, that Princess Mary might do so if she
 chose, but they were not to be admitted to him. She had decided to receive them,
 but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge in some freak, as he seem
ed much upset by the Rostovs' visit.  "There, my dear princess, I've brought you 
my songstress," said the count, bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid th
e old prince might appear. "I am so glad you should get to know one another... ve
ry sorry the prince is still ailing," and after a few more commonplace remarks he
 rose. "If you'll allow me to leave my Natasha in your hands for a quarter of an 
hour, Princess, I'll drive round to see Anna Semenovna, it's quite near in the Do
gs' Square, and then I'll come back for her."  The count had devised this diploma
tic ruse as he afterwards told his daughter to give the future sistersinlaw an op
portunity to talk to one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the dang
er of encountering the old prince, of whom he was afraid. He did not mention this
 to his daughter, but Natasha noticed her father's nervousness and anxiety and fe
lt mortified by it. She blushed for him, grew still angrier at having blushed, an
d looked at the princess with a bold and defiant expression which said that she w
as not afraid of anybody. The princess told the count that she would be delighted
, and only begged him to stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed.  Despi
te the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Marywho wished to have a teteatet
e with NatashaMademoiselle Bourienne remained in the room and persistently talked
 about Moscow amusements and theaters. Natasha felt offended by the hesitation sh
e had noticed in the anteroom, by her father's nervousness, and by the unnatural 
manner of the princess whoshe thoughtwas making a favor of receiving her, and so 
everything displeased her. She did not like Princess Mary, whom she thought very 
plain, affected, and dry. Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and involuntarily 
assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary still more. After five minut
es of irksome, constrained conversation, they heard the sound of slippered feet r
apidly approaching. Princess Mary looked frightened.  The door opened and the old
 prince, in a dressing gown and a white nightcap, came in.  "Ah, madam!" he began
. "Madam, Countess... Countess Rostova, if I am not mistaken... I beg you to excu
se me, to excuse me... I did not know, madam. God is my witness, I did not know y
ou had honored us with a visit, and I came in such a costume only to see my daugh
ter. I beg you to excuse me... God is my witness, I didn't know" he repeated, str
essing the word "God" so unnaturally and so unpleasantly that Princess Mary stood
 with downcast eyes not daring to look either at her father or at Natasha.  Nor d
id the latter, having risen and curtsied, know what to do. Mademoiselle Bourienne
 alone smiled agreeably.  "I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is my witness, 
I did not know," muttered the old man, and after looking Natasha over from head t
o foot he went out.  Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself afte
r this apparition and began speaking about the prince's indisposition. Natasha an
d Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and the longer they did so with
out saying what they wanted to say, the greater grew their antipathy to one anoth
er.  When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened to get 
away at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, who could place her in
 such an embarrassing position and had spent half an hour with her without once m
entioning Prince Andrew. "I couldn't begin talking about him in the presence of t
hat Frenchwoman," thought Natasha. The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Prin
cess Mary. She knew what she ought to have said to Natasha, but she had been unab
le to say it because Mademoiselle Bourienne was in the way, and because, without 
knowing why, she felt it very difficult to speak of the marriage. When the count 
was already leaving the room, Princess Mary went up hurriedly to Natasha, took he
r by the hand, and said with a deep sigh  "Wait, I must..."  Natasha glanced at h
er ironically without knowing why.  "Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want y
ou to know that I am glad my brother has found happiness...."  She paused, feelin
g that she was not telling the truth. Natasha noticed this and guessed its reason
.  "I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now," she said with 
external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tears choking her.  "What have
 I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as she was out of the room.  
They waited a long time for Natasha to come to dinner that day. She sat in her ro
om crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. Sonya stood beside her, kis
sing her hair.  "Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. "What do they matter to y
ou? It will all pass, Natasha."  "But if you only knew how offensive it was... as
 if I..."  "Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your fault so why should you 
mind? Kiss me," said Sonya.  Natasha raised her head and, kissing her friend on t
he lips, pressed her wet face against her.  "I can't tell you, I don't know. No o
ne's to blame," said Natasha"It's my fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why do
esn't he come?..."  She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who kn
ew how the prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how upset Nat
asha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count and the other g
uests.      CHAPTER VIII   That evening the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which 
Marya Dmitrievna had taken a box.  Natasha did not want to go, but could not refu
se Marya Dmitrievna's kind offer which was intended expressly for her. When she c
ame ready dressed into the ballroom to await her father, and looking in the large
 mirror there saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more sad, but i
t was a sweet, tender sadness.  "O God, if he were here now I would not behave as
 I did then, but differently. I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would 
simply embrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with those searching in
quiring eyes with which he has so often looked at me, and then I would make him l
augh as he used to laugh. And his eyeshow I see those eyes!" thought Natasha. "An
d what do his father and sister matter to me? I love him alone, him, him, with th
at face and those eyes, with his smile, manly and yet childlike.... No, I had bet
ter not think of him not think of him but forget him, quite forget him for the pr
esent. I can't bear this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!" and she turned awa
y from the glass, making an effort not to cry. "And how can Sonya love Nicholas s
o calmly and quietly and wait so long and so patiently?" thought she, looking at 
Sonya, who also came in quite ready, with a fan in her hand. "No, she's altogethe
r different. I can't!"  Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that i
t was not enough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, at onc
e, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words of love such as
 filled her heart. While she sat in the carriage beside her father, pensively wat
ching the lights of the street lamps flickering on the frozen window, she felt st
ill sadder and more in love, and forgot where she was going and with whom. Having
 fallen into the line of carriages, the Rostovs' carriage drove up to the theater
, its wheels squeaking over the snow. Natasha and Sonya, holding up their dresses
, jumped out quickly. The count got out helped by the footmen, and, passing among
 men and women who were entering and the program sellers, they all three went alo
ng the corridor to the first row of boxes. Through the closed doors the music was
 already audible.  "Natasha, your hair!..." whispered Sonya.  An attendant defere
ntially and quickly slipped before the ladies and opened the door of their box. T
he music sounded louder and through the door rows of brightly lit boxes in which 
ladies sat with bare arms and shoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms
, glittered before their eyes. A lady entering the next box shot a glance of femi
nine envy at Natasha. The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was being pl
ayed. Natasha, smoothing her gown, went in with Sonya and sat down, scanning the 
brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A sensation she had not experienced for a long
 timethat of hundreds of eyes looking at her bare arms and necksuddenly affected 
her both agreeably and disagreeably and called up a whole crowd of memories, desi
res and emotions associated with that feeling.  The two remarkably pretty girls, 
Natasha and Sonya, with Count Rostov who had not been seen in Moscow for a long t
ime, attracted general attention. Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natasha's e
ngagement to Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in the country ev
er since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee who was making one of the be
st matches in Russia.  Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the
 country, and that evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty. S
he struck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty, combined with her
 indifference to everything about her. Her black eyes looked at the crowd without
 seeking anyone, and her delicate arm, bare to above the elbow, lay on the velvet
 edge of the box, while, evidently unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand 
in time to the music, crumpling her program. "Look, there's Alenina," said Sonya,
 "with her mother, isn't it?"  "Dear me, Michael Kirilovich has grown still stout
er!" remarked the count.  "Look at our Anna Mikhaylovnawhat a headdress she has o
n!"  "The Karagins, Julieand Boris with them. One can see at once that they're en
gaged...."  "Drubetskoy has proposed?"  "Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin
, coming into the Rostovs' box.  Natasha looked in the direction in which her fat
her's eyes were turned and saw Julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look 
on her face and a string of pearls round her thick red neckwhich Natasha knew was
 covered with powder. Behind them, wearing a smile and leaning over with an ear t
o Julie's mouth, was Boris' handsome smoothly brushed head. He looked at the Rost
ovs from under his brows and said something, smiling, to his betrothed.  "They ar
e talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha. "And he no doubt is calmi
ng her jealousy of me. They needn't trouble themselves! If only they knew how lit
tle I am concerned about any of them."  Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing 
a green headdress and with a happy look of resignation to the will of God on her 
face. Their box was pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Nata
sha knew so well and liked so much. She turned away and suddenly remembered all t
hat had been so humiliating in her morning's visit.  "What right has he not to wi
sh to receive me into his family? Oh, better not think of itnot till he comes bac
k!" she told herself, and began looking at the faces, some strange and some famil
iar, in the stalls. In the front, in the very center, leaning back against the or
chestra rail, stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress, his curly hair brushed up into a
 huge shock. He stood in full view of the audience, well aware that he was attrac
ting everyone's attention, yet as much at ease as though he were in his own room.
 Around him thronged Moscow's most brilliant young men, whom he evidently dominat
ed.  The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her former ado
rer.  "Do you recognize him?" said he. "And where has he sprung from?" he asked, 
turning to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?"  "He did," replied Shinshin. "
He was in the Caucasus and ran away from there. They say he has been acting as mi
nister to some ruling prince in Persia, where he killed the Shah's brother. Now a
ll the Moscow ladies are mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does it!
 We never hear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned. They swear by him, they offer hi
m to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. Dolokhov and Anatole Kuragin hav
e turned all our ladies' heads."  A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited 
hair and much exposed plump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a doub
le string of large pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dres
s and took a long time settling into her place.  Natasha involuntarily gazed at t
hat neck, those shoulders, and pearls and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the
 shoulders and the pearls. While Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the secon
d time the lady looked round and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him and smi
led. She was the Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and the count, who knew every
one in society, leaned over and spoke to her.  "Have you been here long, Countess
?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'll call to kiss your hand. I'm here on business and
 have brought my girls with me. They say Semenova acts marvelously. Count Pierre 
never used to forget us. Is he here?"  "Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helen
e, and glanced attentively at Natasha.  Count Rostov resumed his seat.  "Handsome
, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.  "Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a w
oman one could easily fall in love with."  Just then the last chords of the overt
ure were heard and the conductor tapped with his stick. Some latecomers took thei
r seats in the stalls, and the curtain rose.  As soon as it rose everyone in the 
boxes and stalls became silent, and all the men, old and young, in uniform and ev
ening dress, and all the women with gems on their bare flesh, turned their whole 
attention with eager curiosity to the stage. Natasha too began to look at it.    
  CHAPTER IX   The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides wa
s some painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a cloth stretche
d over boards. In the center of the stage sat some girls in red bodices and white
 skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk dress sat apart on a low bench, to the
 back of which a piece of green cardboard was glued. They all sang something. Whe
n they had finished their song the girl in white went up to the prompter's box an
d a man with tight silk trousers over his stout legs, and holding a plume and a d
agger, went up to her and began singing, waving his arms about.  First the man in
 the tight trousers sang alone, then she sang, then they both paused while the or
chestra played and the man fingered the hand of the girl in white, obviously awai
ting the beat to start singing with her. They sang together and everyone in the t
heater began clapping and shouting, while the man and woman on the stagewho repre
sented loversbegan smiling, spreading out their arms, and bowing.  After her life
 in the country, and in her present serious mood, all this seemed grotesque and a
mazing to Natasha. She could not follow the opera nor even listen to the music sh
e saw only the painted cardboard and the queerly dressed men and women who moved,
 spoke, and sang so strangely in that brilliant light. She knew what it was all m
eant to represent, but it was so pretentiously false and unnatural that she first
 felt ashamed for the actors and then amused at them. She looked at the faces of 
the audience, seeking in them the same sense of ridicule and perplexity she herse
lf experienced, but they all seemed attentive to what was happening on the stage,
 and expressed delight which to Natasha seemed feigned. "I suppose it has to be l
ike this!" she thought. She kept looking round in turn at the rows of pomaded hea
ds in the stalls and then at the seminude women in the boxes, especially at Helen
e in the next box, whoapparently quite unclothedsat with a quiet tranquil smile, 
not taking her eyes off the stage. And feeling the bright light that flooded the 
whole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natasha little by little began 
to pass into a state of intoxication she had not experienced for a long while. Sh
e did not realize who and where she was, nor what was going on before her. As she
 looked and thought, the strangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed
 through her mind the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of the box an
d singing the air the actress was singing, then she wished to touch with her fan 
an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then to lean over to Helene and tickle
 her.  At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, a door l
eading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' box creaked, and the steps 
of a belated arrival were heard. "There's Kuragin!" whispered Shinshin. Countess 
Bezukhova turned smiling to the newcomer, and Natasha, following the direction of
 that look, saw an exceptionally handsome adjutant approaching their box with a s
elfassured yet courteous bearing. This was Anatole Kuragin whom she had seen and 
noticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg. He was now in an adjutant's uniform w
ith one epaulet and a shoulder knot. He moved with a restrained swagger which wou
ld have been ridiculous had he not been so goodlooking and had his handsome face 
not worn such an expression of goodhumored complacency and gaiety. Though the per
formance was proceeding, he walked deliberately down the carpeted gangway, his sw
ord and spurs slightly jingling and his handsome perfumed head held high. Having 
looked at Natasha he approached his sister, laid his well gloved hand on the edge
 of her box, nodded to her, and leaning forward asked a question, with a motion t
oward Natasha.  "Mais charmante!" said he, evidently referring to Natasha, who di
d not exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of his lips. T
hen he took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat down beside Dolokhov
, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand way that Dolokhov whom others 
treated so fawningly. He winked at him gaily, smiled, and rested his foot against
 the orchestra screen.  "How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the cou
nt. "And how handsome they both are!"  Shinshin, lowering his voice, began to tel
l the count of some intrigue of Kuragin's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhea
r it just because he had said she was "charmante."  The first act was over. In th
e stalls everyone began moving about, going out and coming in.  Boris came to the
 Rostovs' box, received their congratulations very simply, and raising his eyebro
ws with an absentminded smile conveyed to Natasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitat
ion to her wedding, and went away. Natasha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to
 him, and congratulated on his approaching wedding that same Boris with whom she 
had formerly been in love. In the state of intoxication she was in, everything se
emed simple and natural.  The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same
 way, and Natasha gave Boris a similar smile.  Helene's box was filled and surrou
nded from the stalls by the most distinguished and intellectual men, who seemed t
o vie with one another in their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.  Dur
ing the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov in front of the orche
stra partition, looking at the Rostovs' box. Natasha knew he was talking about he
r and this afforded her pleasure. She even turned so that he should see her profi
le in what she thought was its most becoming aspect. Before the beginning of the 
second act Pierre appeared in the stalls. The Rostovs had not seen him since thei
r arrival. His face looked sad, and he had grown still stouter since Natasha last
 saw him. He passed up to the front rows, not noticing anyone. Anatole went up to
 him and began speaking to him, looking at and indicating the Rostovs' box. On se
eing Natasha Pierre grew animated and, hastily passing between the rows, came tow
ard their box. When he got there he leaned on his elbows and, smiling, talked to 
her for a long time. While conversing with Pierre, Natasha heard a man's voice in
 Countess Bezukhova's box and something told her it was Kuragin. She turned and t
heir eyes met. Almost smiling, he gazed straight into her eyes with such an enrap
tured caressing look that it seemed strange to be so near him, to look at him lik
e that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with him.  In the 
second act there was scenery representing tombstones, there was a round hole in t
he canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised over the footlights, and from
 horns and contrabass came deep notes while many people appeared from right and l
eft wearing black cloaks and holding things like daggers in their hands. They beg
an waving their arms. Then some other people ran in and began dragging away the m
aiden who had been in white and was now in light blue. They did not drag her away
 at once, but sang with her for a long time and then at last dragged her off, and
 behind the scenes something metallic was struck three times and everyone knelt d
own and sang a prayer. All these things were repeatedly interrupted by the enthus
iastic shouts of the audience.  During this act every time Natasha looked toward 
the stalls she saw Anatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chai
r, staring at her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it di
d not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it.  When the second act was 
over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to the Rostovs' boxher whole bosom completel
y exposedbeckoned the old count with a gloved finger, and paying no attention to 
those who had entered her box began talking to him with an amiable smile.  "Do ma
ke me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she. "The whole town is sing
ing their praises and I don't even know then!"  Natasha rose and curtsied to the 
splendid countess. She was so pleased by praise from this brilliant beauty that s
he blushed with pleasure.  "I want to become a Moscovite too, now," said Helene. 
"How is it you're not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"  Countess Bezu
khova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinating woman. She could say w
hat she did not thinkespecially what was flatteringquite simply and naturally.  "
Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I am not staying he
re long this timenor are youI will try to amuse them. I have already heard much o
f you in Petersburg and wanted to get to know you," said she to Natasha with her 
stereotyped and lovely smile. "I had heard about you from my page, Drubetskoy. Ha
ve you heard he is getting married? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski, 
Prince Andrew Bolkonski," she went on with special emphasis, implying that she kn
ew of his relation to Natasha. To get better acquainted she asked that one of the
 young ladies should come into her box for the rest of the performance, and Natas
ha moved over to it.  The scene of the third act represented a palace in which ma
ny candles were burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on the wal
ls. In the middle stood what were probably a king and a queen. The king waved his
 right arm and, evidently nervous, sang something badly and sat down on a crimson
 throne. The maiden who had been first in white and then in light blue, now wore 
only a smock, and stood beside the throne with her hair down. She sang something 
mournfully, addressing the queen, but the king waved his arm severely, and men an
d women with bare legs came in from both sides and began dancing all together. Th
en the violins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thick ba
re legs and thin arms, separating from the others, went behind the wings, adjuste
d her bodice, returned to the middle of the stage, and began jumping and striking
 one foot rapidly against the other. In the stalls everyone clapped and shouted "
bravo!" Then one of the men went into a corner of the stage. The cymbals and horn
s in the orchestra struck up more loudly, and this man with bare legs jumped very
 high and waved his feet about very rapidly. He was Duport, who received sixty th
ousand rubles a year for this art. Everybody in the stalls, boxes, and galleries 
began clapping and shouting with all their might, and the man stopped and began s
miling and bowing to all sides. Then other men and women danced with bare legs. T
hen the king again shouted to the sound of music, and they all began singing. But
 suddenly a storm came on, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in
 the orchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their number away, and th
e curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noise and clatter among the aud
ience, and with rapturous faces everyone began shouting "Duport! Duport! Duport!"
 Natasha no longer thought this strange. She looked about with pleasure, smiling 
joyfully.  "Isn't Duport delightful?" Helene asked her.  "Oh, yes," replied Natas
ha.      CHAPTER X   During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's 
box, the door opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brush again
st anyone.  "Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shifting 
uneasily from Natasha to Anatole.  Natasha turned her pretty little head toward t
he elegant young officer and smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who w
as as handsome at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told h
er he had long wished to have this happinessever since the Naryshkins' ball in fa
ct, at which he had had the wellremembered pleasure of seeing her. Kuragin was mu
ch more sensible and simple with women than among men. He talked boldly and natur
ally, and Natasha was strangely and agreeably struck by the fact that there was n
othing formidable in this man about whom there was so much talk, but that on the 
contrary his smile was most naive, cheerful, and goodnatured.  Kuragin asked her 
opinion of the performance and told her how at a previous performance Semenova ha
d fallen down on the stage.  "And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addre
ssing her as an old, familiar acquaintance, "we are getting up a costume tourname
nt you ought to take part in it! It will be great fun. We shall all meet at the K
aragins'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" said he.  While saying this he never remo
ved his smiling eyes from her face, her neck, and her bare arms. Natasha knew for
 certain that he was enraptured by her. This pleased her, yet his presence made h
er feel constrained and oppressed. When she was not looking at him she felt that 
he was looking at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he 
should look into hers rather than this. But looking into his eyes she was frighte
ned, realizing that there was not that barrier of modesty she had always felt bet
ween herself and other men. She did not know how it was that within five minutes 
she had come to feel herself terribly near to this man. When she turned away she 
feared he might seize her from behind by her bare arm and kiss her on the neck. T
hey spoke of most ordinary things, yet she felt that they were closer to one anot
her than she had ever been to any man. Natasha kept turning to Helene and to her 
father, as if asking what it all meant, but Helene was engaged in conversation wi
th a general and did not answer her look, and her father's eyes said nothing but 
what they always said "Having a good time? Well, I'm glad of it!"  During one of 
these moments of awkward silence when Anatole's prominent eyes were gazing calmly
 and fixedly at her, Natasha, to break the silence, asked him how he liked Moscow
. She asked the question and blushed. She felt all the time that by talking to hi
m she was doing something improper. Anatole smiled as though to encourage her.  "
At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant ce sont les j
olies femmes, * isn't that so? But now I like it very much indeed," he said, look
ing at her significantly. "You'll come to the costume tournament, Countess? Do co
me!" and putting out his hand to her bouquet and dropping his voice, he added, "Y
ou will be the prettiest there. Do come, dear countess, and give me this flower a
s a pledge!"       * Are the pretty women.   Natasha did not understand what he w
as saying any more than he did himself, but she felt that his incomprehensible wo
rds had an improper intention. She did not know what to say and turned away as if
 she had not heard his remark. But as soon as she had turned away she felt that h
e was there, behind, so close behind her.  "How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought
 I to put it right?" she asked herself, and she could not refrain from turning ro
und. She looked straight into his eyes, and his nearness, selfassurance, and the 
goodnatured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just as he was doi
ng, gazing straight into his eyes. And again she felt with horror that no barrier
 lay between him and her.  The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene a
nd gay. Natasha went back to her father in the other box, now quite submissive to
 the world she found herself in. All that was going on before her now seemed quit
e natural, but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of her betrothed, of P
rincess Mary, or of life in the country did not once recur to her mind and were a
s if belonging to a remote past.  In the fourth act there was some sort of devil 
who sang waving his arm about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and 
he disappeared down below. That was the only part of the fourth act that Natasha 
saw. She felt agitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kuragin whom she 
could not help watching. As they were leaving the theater Anatole came up to them
, called their carriage, and helped them in. As he was putting Natasha in he pres
sed her arm above the elbow. Agitated and flushed she turned round. He was lookin
g at her with glittering eyes, smiling tenderly.   Only after she had reached hom
e was Natasha able clearly to think over what had happened to her, and suddenly r
emembering Prince Andrew she was horrified, and at tea to which all had sat down 
after the opera, she gave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room.  
"O God! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How could I let him?" She sat for a lon
g time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying to realize what had happened t
o her, but was unable either to understand what had happened or what she felt. Ev
erything seemed dark, obscure, and terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated 
theater where the barelegged Duport, in a tinseldecorated jacket, jumped about to
 the music on wet boards, and young girls and old men, and the nearly naked Helen
e with her proud, calm smile, rapturously cried "bravo!"there in the presence of 
that Helene it had all seemed clear and simple but now, alone by herself, it was 
incomprehensible. "What is it? What was that terror I felt of him? What is this g
nawing of conscience I am feeling now?" she thought.  Only to the old countess at
 night in bed could Natasha have told all she was feeling. She knew that Sonya wi
th her severe and simple views would either not understand it at all or would be 
horrified at such a confession. So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her 
by herself.  "Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and with
 soothing irony replied "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happen to me? Not
hing! I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all. Nobody will know and I sh
all never see him again," she told herself. "So it is plain that nothing has happ
ened and there is nothing to repent of, and Andrew can love me still. But why 'st
ill?' O God, why isn't he here?" Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but again 
some instinct told her that though all this was true, and though nothing had happ
ened, yet the former purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished. And again
 in imagination she went over her whole conversation with Kuragin, and again saw 
the face, gestures, and tender smile of that bold handsome man when he pressed he
r arm.      CHAPTER XI   Anatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father
 had sent him away from Petersburg, where he had been spending twenty thousand ru
bles a year in cash, besides running up debts for as much more, which his credito
rs demanded from his father.  His father announced to him that he would now pay h
alf his debts for the last time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow as 
adjutant to the commander in chiefa post his father had procured for himand would
 at last try to make a good match there. He indicated to him Princess Mary and Ju
lie Karagina.  Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre's 
house. Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to him after a whil
e, sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, and gave him money under the 
guise of loans.  As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole h
ad turned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that he slighted
 them and plainly preferred the gypsy girls and French actresseswith the chief of
 whom, Mademoiselle George, he was said to be on intimate relations. He had never
 missed a carousal at Danilov's or other Moscow revelers', drank whole nights thr
ough, outvying everyone else, and was at all the balls and parties of the best so
ciety. There was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies, and he flirted wi
th a few of them at the balls. But he did not run after the unmarried girls, espe
cially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain. There was a special reason
 for this, as he had got married two years beforea fact known only to his most in
timate friends. At that time while with his regiment in Poland, a Polish landowne
r of small means had forced him to marry his daughter. Anatole had very soon aban
doned his wife and, for a payment which he agreed to send to his fatherinlaw, had
 arranged to be free to pass himself off as a bachelor.  Anatole was always conte
nt with his position, with himself, and with others. He was instinctively and tho
roughly convinced that it was impossible for him to live otherwise than as he did
 and that he had never in his life done anything base. He was incapable of consid
ering how his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this or tha
t action of his might be. He was convinced that, as a duck is so made that it mus
t live in water, so God had made him such that he must spend thirty thousand rubl
es a year and always occupy a prominent position in society. He believed this so 
firmly that others, looking at him, were persuaded of it too and did not refuse h
im either a leading place in society or money, which he borrowed from anyone and 
everyone and evidently would not repay.  He was not a gambler, at any rate he did
 not care about winning. He was not vain. He did not mind what people thought of 
him. Still less could he be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed his 
father by spoiling his own career, and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds. H
e was not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him. All he cared about wa
s gaiety and women, and as according to his ideas there was nothing dishonorable 
in these tastes, and he was incapable of considering what the gratification of hi
s tastes entailed for others, he honestly considered himself irreproachable, sinc
erely despised rogues and bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his 
head high.  Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocence simi
lar to that which female Magdalenes have, based on the same hope of forgiveness. 
"All will be forgiven her, for she loved much and all will be forgiven him, for h
e enjoyed much."  Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exil
e and his Persian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling, and dis
sipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuragin and made use of him 
for his own ends.  Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and 
audacity. Dolokhov, who needed Anatole Kuragin's name, position, and connections 
as a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set, made use of him and amuse
d himself at his expense without letting the other feel it. Apart from the advant
age he derived from Anatole, the very process of dominating another's will was in
 itself a pleasure, a habit, and a necessity to Dolokhov.  Natasha had made a str
ong impression on Kuragin. At supper after the opera he described to Dolokhov wit
h the air of a connoisseur the attractions of her arms, shoulders, feet, and hair
 and expressed his intention of making love to her. Anatole had no notion and was
 incapable of considering what might come of such lovemaking, as he never had any
 notion of the outcome of any of his actions.  "She's firstrate, my dear fellow, 
but not for us," replied Dolokhov.  "I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner,"
 said Anatole. "Eh?"  "You'd better wait till she's married...."  "You know, I ad
ore little girls, they lose their heads at once," pursued Anatole.  "You have bee
n caught once already by a 'little girl,'" said Dolokhov who knew of Kuragin's ma
rriage. "Take care!"  "Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with a g
oodhumored laugh.      CHAPTER XII   The day after the opera the Rostovs went now
here and nobody came to see them. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about some
thing which they concealed from Natasha. Natasha guessed they were talking about 
the old prince and planning something, and this disquieted and offended her. She 
was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent a manservant to th
e Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come. He had not arrived. She suffered
 more now than during her first days in Moscow. To her impatience and pining for 
him were now added the unpleasant recollection of her interview with Princess Mar
y and the old prince, and a fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the 
cause. She continually fancied that either he would never come or that something 
would happen to her before he came. She could no longer think of him by herself c
almly and continuously as she had done before. As soon as she began to think of h
im, the recollection of the old prince, of Princess Mary, of the theater, and of 
Kuragin mingled with her thoughts. The question again presented itself whether sh
e was not guilty, whether she had not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, an
d again she found herself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gest
ure, and every shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who had bee
n able to arouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifying feeling. To the f
amily Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she was far less tranquil and happy
 than before.  On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at
 her parish churchthe Church of the Assumption built over the graves of victims o
f the plague.  "I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently pri
ding herself on her independence of thought. "God is the same every where. We hav
e an excellent priest, he conducts the service decently and with dignity, and the
 deacon is the same. What holiness is there in giving concerts in the choir? I do
n't like it, it's just selfindulgence!"  Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew 
how to keep them. Her whole house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays neither s
he nor the servants worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church. A
t her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodka and roa
st goose or suckling pig. But in nothing in the house was the holiday so noticeab
le as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern face, which on that day wore an invariab
le look of solemn festivity.  After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in 
the dining room where the loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a ser
vant announced that the carriage was ready, and Marya Dmitrievna rose with a ster
n air. She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid calls, and announced that sh
e was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have an explanation with him abou
t Natasha.  After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame SuppertRoguet waited on 
the Rostovs, and Natasha, very glad of this diversion, having shut herself into a
 room adjoining the drawing room, occupied herself trying on the new dresses. Jus
t as she had put on a bodice without sleeves and only tacked together, and was tu
rning her head to see in the glass how the back fitted, she heard in the drawing 
room the animated sounds of her father's voice and another'sa woman'sthat made he
r flush. It was Helene. Natasha had not time to take off the bodice before the do
or opened and Countess Bezukhova, dressed in a purple velvet gown with a high col
lar, came into the room beaming with goodhumored amiable smiles.  "Oh, my enchant
ress!" she cried to the blushing Natasha. "Charming! No, this is really beyond an
ything, my dear count," said she to Count Rostov who had followed her in. "How ca
n you live in Moscow and go nowhere? No, I won't let you off! Mademoiselle George
 will recite at my house tonight and there'll be some people, and if you don't br
ing your lovely girlswho are prettier than Mademoiselle GeorgeI won't know you! M
y husband is away in Tver or I would send him to fetch you. You must come. You po
sitively must! Between eight and nine."  She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she k
new and who had curtsied respectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair b
eside the looking glass, draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely. She
 did not cease chattering goodnaturedly and gaily, continually praising Natasha's
 beauty. She looked at Natasha's dresses and praised them, as well as a new dress
 of her own made of "metallic gauze," which she had received from Paris, and advi
sed Natasha to have one like it.  "But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remar
ked.  A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face. She felt happy and as if she
 were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezukhova who had formerl
y seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was now so kind to her. Natas
ha brightened up and felt almost in love with this woman, who was so beautiful an
d so kind. Helene for her part was sincerely delighted with Natasha and wished to
 give her a good time. Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natasha together, a
nd she was calling on the Rostovs for that purpose. The idea of throwing her brot
her and Natasha together amused her.  Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had 
been annoyed with Natasha for drawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, 
and in her own way heartily wished Natasha well. As she was leaving the Rostovs s
he called her protegee aside.  "My brother dined with me yesterdaywe nearly died 
of laughterhe ate nothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly, quit
e madly, in love with you, my dear."  Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this
.  "How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "You must certainl
y come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a reason to shut yourself u
p. Even if you are engaged, I am sure your fiance would wish you to go into socie
ty rather than be bored to death."  "So she knows I am engaged, and she and her h
usband Pierrethat good Pierrehave talked and laughed about this. So it's all righ
t." And again, under Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible now seemed simp
le and natural. "And she is such a grande dame, so kind, and evidently likes me s
o much. And why not enjoy myself?" thought Natasha, gazing at Helene with wideope
n, wondering eyes.  Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, ha
ving evidently suffered a defeat at the old prince's. She was still too agitated 
by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly. In answer to the count'
s inquiries she replied that things were all right and that she would tell about 
it next day. On hearing of Countess Bezukhova's visit and the invitation for that
 evening, Marya Dmitrievna remarked  "I don't care to have anything to do with Be
zukhova and don't advise you to however, if you've promisedgo. It will divert you
r thoughts," she added, addressing Natasha.      CHAPTER XIII   Count Rostov took
 the girls to Countess Bezukhova's. There were a good many people there, but near
ly all strangers to Natasha. Count Rostov was displeased to see that the company 
consisted almost entirely of men and women known for the freedom of their conduct
. Mademoiselle George was standing in a corner of the drawing room surrounded by 
young men. There were several Frenchmen present, among them Metivier who from the
 time Helene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house. The count decided 
not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight and to get away as soo
n as Mademoiselle George's performance was over.  Anatole was at the door, eviden
tly on the lookout for the Rostovs. Immediately after greeting the count he went 
up to Natasha and followed her. As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same
 feeling she had had at the operagratified vanity at his admiration of her and fe
ar at the absence of a moral barrier between them.  Helene welcomed Natasha delig
htedly and was loud in admiration of her beauty and her dress. Soon after their a
rrival Mademoiselle George went out of the room to change her costume. In the dra
wing room people began arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved
 a chair for Natasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count, who nev
er lost sight of her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat down behind her.  Mademo
iselle George, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a red shawl draped over one 
shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, and assumed an unnatural pose.
 Enthusiastic whispering was audible.  Mademoiselle George looked sternly and glo
omily at the audience and began reciting some French verses describing her guilty
 love for her son. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered, 
lifting her head triumphantly sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse sounds, rol
ling her eyes.  "Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.  Natash
a looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nor understood anything of
 what went on before her. She only felt herself again completely borne away into 
this strange senseless worldso remote from her old worlda world in which it was i
mpossible to know what was good or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her sat A
natole, and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense of expe
ctancy.  After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded Mademois
elle George, expressing their enthusiasm.  "How beautiful she is!" Natasha remark
ed to her father who had also risen and was moving through the crowd toward the a
ctress.  "I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, following Natasha. 
He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him. "You are enchanting... fr
om the moment I saw you I have never ceased..."  "Come, come, Natasha!" said the 
count, as he turned back for his daughter. "How beautiful she is!" Natasha withou
t saying anything stepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inqui
ring eyes.  After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and Count
ess Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.  The count wished to go home,
 but Helene entreated him not to spoil her improvised ball, and the Rostovs staye
d on. Anatole asked Natasha for a valse and as they danced he pressed her waist a
nd hand and told her she was bewitching and that he loved her. During the ecossai
se, which she also danced with him, Anatole said nothing when they happened to be
 by themselves, but merely gazed at her. Natasha lifted her frightened eyes to hi
m, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look and smile tha
t she could not, whilst looking at him, say what she had to say. She lowered her 
eyes.  "Don't say such things to me. I am betrothed and love another," she said r
apidly.... She glanced at him.  Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had s
aid.  "Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you I am madly
, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you are enchanting?... It's our tu
rn to begin."  Natasha, animated and excited, looked about her with wideopen frig
htened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardly anything that we
nt on that evening. They danced the ecossaise and the Grossvater. Her father aske
d her to come home, but she begged to remain. Wherever she went and whomever she 
was speaking to, she felt his eyes upon her. Later on she recalled how she had as
ked her father to let her go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, that He
lene had followed her and spoken laughingly of her brother's love, and that she a
gain met Anatole in the little sitting room. Helene had disappeared leaving them 
alone, and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice  "I cannot come 
to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see you? I love you madly. Can
 I never...?" and, blocking her path, he brought his face close to hers.  His lar
ge, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw nothing but the
m.  "Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being painfully 
pressed. "Natalie?"  "I don't understand. I have nothing to say," her eyes replie
d.  Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she felt herself r
eleased, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her dress were heard in the roo
m. Natasha looked round at her, and then, red and trembling, threw a frightened l
ook of inquiry at Anatole and moved toward the door.  "One word, just one, for Go
d's sake!" cried Anatole.  She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would e
xplain to her what had happened and to which she could find no answer.  "Natalie,
 just a word, only one!" he kept repeating, evidently not knowing what to say and
 he repeated it till Helene came up to them.  Helene returned with Natasha to the
 drawing room. The Rostovs went away without staying for supper.  After reaching 
home Natasha did not sleep all night. She was tormented by the insoluble question
 whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew. She loved Prince Andrewshe remembere
d distinctly how deeply she loved him. But she also loved Anatole, of that there 
was no doubt. "Else how could all this have happened?" thought she. "If, after th
at, I could return his smile when saying goodby, if I was able to let it come to 
that, it means that I loved him from the first. It means that he is kind, noble, 
and splendid, and I could not help loving him. What am I to do if I love him and 
the other one too?" she asked herself, unable to find an answer to these terrible
 questions.      CHAPTER XIV   Morning came with its cares and bustle. Everyone g
ot up and began to move about and talk, dressmakers came again. Marya Dmitrievna 
appeared, and they were called to breakfast. Natasha kept looking uneasily at eve
rybody with wideopen eyes, as if wishing to intercept every glance directed towar
d her, and tried to appear the same as usual.  After breakfast, which was her bes
t time, Marya Dmitrievna sat down in her armchair and called Natasha and the coun
t to her.  "Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this is m
y advice," she began. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Prince Bolkonski. We
ll, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head to begin shouting, but I a
m not one to be shouted down. I said what I had to say!"  "Well, and he?" asked t
he count.  "He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the use of ta
lking? As it is we have worn the poor girl out," said Marya Dmitrievna. "My advic
e to you is finish your business and go back home to Otradnoe... and wait there."
  "Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha.  "Yes, go back," said Marya Dmitrievna, "and wait 
there. If your betrothed comes here nowthere will be no avoiding a quarrel but al
one with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you."  Count Ro
stov approved of this suggestion, appreciating its reasonableness. If the old man
 came round it would be all the better to visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills la
ter on and if not, the wedding, against his wishes, could only be arranged at Otr
adnoe.  "That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took her," 
said the old count.  "No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects.
 But if he won'tthat's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking for something 
in her reticule. "Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there is nothing to wait fo
r and what is not ready I'll send after you. Though I don't like letting you go, 
it is the best way. So go, with God's blessing!"  Having found what she was looki
ng for in the reticule she handed it to Natasha. It was a letter from Princess Ma
ry.  "She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She's afraid 
you might think that she does not like you."  "But she doesn't like me," said Nat
asha.  "Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.  "I shan't believe anyone, 
I know she doesn't like me," replied Natasha boldly as she took the letter, and h
er face expressed a cold and angry resolution that caused Marya Dmitrievna to loo
k at her more intently and to frown.  "Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she
 said. "What I say is true! Write an answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to h
er own room to read Princess Mary's letter.  Princess Mary wrote that she was in 
despair at the misunderstanding that had occurred between them. Whatever her fath
er's feelings might be, she begged Natasha to believe that she could not help lov
ing her as the one chosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sa
crifice everything.  "Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is illdi
sposed toward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must be forgiven but he is
 good and magnanimous and will love her who makes his son happy." Princess Mary w
ent on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she could see her again.  After reading 
the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table to answer it. "Dear Princess," s
he wrote in French quickly and mechanically, and then paused. What more could she
 write after all that had happened the evening before? "Yes, yes! All that has ha
ppened, and now all is changed," she thought as she sat with the letter she had b
egun before her. "Must I break off with him? Must I really? That's awful..." and 
to escape from these dreadful thoughts she went to Sonya and began sorting patter
ns with her.  After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princess Ma
ry's letter. "Can it be that it is all over?" she thought. "Can it be that all th
is has happened so quickly and has destroyed all that went before?" She recalled 
her love for Prince Andrew in all its former strength, and at the same time felt 
that she loved Kuragin. She vividly pictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and
 the scenes of happiness with him she had so often repeated in her imagination, a
nd at the same time, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail of yesterday's 
interview with Anatole.  "Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked her
self in complete bewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy but now I hav
e to choose, and I can't be happy without either of them. Only," she thought, "to
 tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it from him are both equally imp
ossible. But with that one nothing is spoiled. But am I really to abandon forever
 the joy of Prince Andrew's love, in which I have lived so long?"  "Please, Miss!
" whispered a maid entering the room with a mysterious air. "A man told me to giv
e you this" and she handed Natasha a letter.  "Only, for Christ's sake..." the gi
rl went on, as Natasha, without thinking, mechanically broke the seal and read a 
love letter from Anatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood only
 that it was a letter from himfrom the man she loved. Yes, she loved him, or else
 how could that have happened which had happened? And how could she have a love l
etter from him in her hand?  With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate lo
ve letter which Dolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found i
n it an echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling.  "Since yesterday 
evening my fate has been sealed to be loved by you or to die. There is no other w
ay for me," the letter began. Then he went on to say that he knew her parents wou
ld not give her to himfor this there were secret reasons he could reveal only to 
herbut that if she loved him she need only say the word yes, and no human power c
ould hinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal her away and carr
y her off to the ends of the earth.  "Yes, yes! I love him!" thought Natasha, rea
ding the letter for the twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning i
n each word of it.  That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs' and 
proposed to take the girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache, remained at ho
me.      CHAPTER XV   On returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha's ro
om, and to her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open on t
he table, beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it up and read it.  As sh
e read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find in her face an explana
tion of what she was reading, but did not find it. Her face was calm, gentle, and
 happy. Clutching her breast to keep herself from choking, Sonya, pale and trembl
ing with fear and agitation, sat down in an armchair and burst into tears.  "How 
was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she have left off loving Pr
ince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go to such lengths? He is a deceiver a
nd a villain, that's plain! What will Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he h
ears of it? So this is the meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the d
ay before yesterday, yesterday, and today," thought Sonya. "But it can't be that 
she loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who it was from. Pr
obably she is offended by it. She could not do such a thing!"  Sonya wiped away h
er tears and went up to Natasha, again scanning her face.  "Natasha!" she said, j
ust audibly.  Natasha awoke and saw Sonya.  "Ah, you're back?"  And with the deci
sion and tenderness that often come at the moment of awakening, she embraced her 
friend, but noticing Sonya's look of embarrassment, her own face expressed confus
ion and suspicion.  "Sonya, you've read that letter?" she demanded.  "Yes," answe
red Sonya softly.  Natasha smiled rapturously.  "No, Sonya, I can't any longer!" 
she said. "I can't hide it from you any longer. You know, we love one another! So
nya, darling, he writes... Sonya..."  Sonya stared openeyed at Natasha, unable to
 believe her ears.  "And Bolkonski?" she asked.  "Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how
 happy I am!" cried Natasha. "You don't know what love is...."  "But, Natasha, ca
n that be all over?"  Natasha looked at Sonya with wideopen eyes as if she could 
not grasp the question.  "Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?" said Sonya
.  "Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't talk nonsense, just listen!" said Na
tasha, with momentary vexation.  "But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don
't understand. How is it you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Wh
y, you have only seen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're jokin
g! In three days to forget everything and so..."  "Three days?" said Natasha. "It
 seems to me I've loved him a hundred years. It seems to me that I have never lov
ed anyone before. You can't understand it.... Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and N
atasha embraced and kissed her.  "I had heard that it happens like this, and you 
must have heard it too, but it's only now that I feel such love. It's not the sam
e as before. As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave, and th
at I could not help loving him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders I shall do. Yo
u don't understand that. What can I do? What can I do, Sonya?" cried Natasha with
 a happy yet frightened expression.  "But think what you are doing," cried Sonya.
 "I can't leave it like this. This secret correspondence... How could you let him
 go so far?" she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.  "I
 told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't you understand? I lov
e him!"  "Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya, burstin
g into tears.  "What do you mean? For God's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy
!" declared Natasha. "You want me to be miserable, you want us to be separated...
."  When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity for her fri
end.  "But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said to you? W
hy doesn't he come to the house?"  Natasha did not answer her questions.  "For Go
d's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me," Natasha entreated. "Rememb
er no one ought to interfere in such matters! I have confided in you...."  "But w
hy this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" asked Sonya. "Why doesn't he 
openly ask for your hand? You know Prince Andrew gave you complete freedomif it i
s really so but I don't believe it! Natasha, have you considered what these secre
t reasons can be?"  Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this que
stion presented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know how to
 answer it.  "I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"  Son
ya sighed and shook her head incredulously.  "If there were reasons..." she began
.  But Natasha, guessing her doubts, interrupted her in alarm.  "Sonya, one can't
 doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't you understand?" she cried.  "Does he lov
e you?"  "Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a smile of pity at her friend's
 lack of comprehension. "Why, you have read his letter and you have seen him."  "
But if he is dishonorable?"  "He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Nata
sha.  "If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions or cease
 seeing you and if you won't do this, I will. I will write to him, and I will tel
l Papa!" said Sonya resolutely.  "But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.  
"Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you saying! Think of your father a
nd of Nicholas."  "I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare you
 say he is dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed Natasha. "Go a
way, Sonya! I don't want to quarrel with you, but go, for God's sake go! You see 
how I am suffering!" Natasha cried angrily, in a voice of despair and repressed i
rritation. Sonya burst into sobs and ran from the room.  Natasha went to the tabl
e and without a moment's reflection wrote that answer to Princess Mary which she 
had been unable to write all the morning. In this letter she said briefly that al
l their misunderstandings were at an end that availing herself of the magnanimity
 of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her her freedom, she begged P
rincess Mary to forget everything and forgive her if she had been to blame toward
 her, but that she could not be his wife. At that moment this all seemed quite ea
sy, simple, and clear to Natasha.   On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the c
ountry, but on Wednesday the count went with the prospective purchaser to his est
ate near Moscow.  On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a 
big dinner party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there. At that 
party Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she spoke to him, trying 
not to be overheard, and that all through dinner she was more agitated than ever.
 When they got home Natasha was the first to begin the explanation Sonya expected
.  "There, Sonya, you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him," Natasha bega
n in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to be praised. "We have had
 an explanation today."  "Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad
 I am you're not angry with me! Tell me everythingthe whole truth. What did he sa
y?"  Natasha became thoughtful.  "Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... 
He asked me what I had promised Bolkonski. He was glad I was free to refuse him."
  Sonya sighed sorrowfully.  "But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she.  "Per
haps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkonski. Why do you think so ba
dly of me?"  "I don't think anything, only I don't understand this..."  "Wait a b
it, Sonya, you'll understand everything. You'll see what a man he is! Now don't t
hink badly of me or of him. I don't think badly of anyone I love and pity everybo
dy. But what am I to do?"  Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used 
toward her. The more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's face 
became, the more serious and stern grew Sonya's.  "Natasha," said she, "you asked
 me not to speak to you, and I haven't spoken, but now you yourself have begun. I
 don't trust him, Natasha. Why this secrecy?"  "Again, again!" interrupted Natash
a.  "Natasha, I am afraid for you!"  "Afraid of what?"  "I am afraid you're going
 to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely, and was herself horrified at what she had 
said.  Anger again showed in Natasha's face.  "And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as
 soon as possible! It's not your business! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer.
 Leave me alone, leave me alone! I hate you!"  "Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast.  
"I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ran out of the roo
m.  Natasha did not speak to Sonya again and avoided her. With the same expressio
n of agitated surprise and guilt she went about the house, taking up now one occu
pation, now another, and at once abandoning them.  Hard as it was for Sonya, she 
watched her friend and did not let her out of her sight.  The day before the coun
t was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha sat by the drawingroom window all the
 morning as if expecting something and that she made a sign to an officer who dro
ve past, whom Sonya took to be Anatole.  Sonya began watching her friend still mo
re attentively and noticed that at dinner and all that evening Natasha was in a s
trange and unnatural state. She answered questions at random, began sentences she
 did not finish, and laughed at everything.  After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid 
at Natasha's door timidly waiting to let her pass. She let the girl go in, and th
en listening at the door learned that another letter had been delivered.  Then su
ddenly it became clear to Sonya that Natasha had some dreadful plan for that even
ing. Sonya knocked at her door. Natasha did not let her in.  "She will run away w
ith him!" thought Sonya. "She is capable of anything. There was something particu
larly pathetic and resolute in her face today. She cried as she said goodby to Un
cle," Sonya remembered. "Yes, that's it, she means to elope with him, but what am
 I to do?" thought she, recalling all the signs that clearly indicated that Natas
ha had some terrible intention. "The count is away. What am I to do? Write to Kur
agin demanding an explanation? But what is there to oblige him to reply? Write to
 Pierre, as Prince Andrew asked me to in case of some misfortune?... But perhaps 
she really has already refused Bolkonskishe sent a letter to Princess Mary yester
day. And Uncle is away...." To tell Marya Dmitrievna who had such faith in Natash
a seemed to Sonya terrible. "Well, anyway," thought Sonya as she stood in the dar
k passage, "now or never I must prove that I remember the family's goodness to me
 and that I love Nicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not leave 
this passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let the family be d
isgraced," thought she.      CHAPTER XVI   Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's
. The plan for Natalie Rostova's abduction had been arranged and the preparations
 made by Dolokhov a few days before, and on the day that Sonya, after listening a
t Natasha's door, resolved to safeguard her, it was to have been put into executi
on. Natasha had promised to come out to Kuragin at the back porch at ten that eve
ning. Kuragin was to put her into a troyka he would have ready and to drive her f
orty miles to the village of Kamenka, where an unfrocked priest was in readiness 
to perform a marriage ceremony over them. At Kamenka a relay of horses was to wai
t which would take them to the Warsaw highroad, and from there they would hasten 
abroad with post horses.  Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten t
housand rubles he had taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed wit
h Dolokhov's help.  Two witnesses for the mock marriageKhvostikov, a retired pett
y official whom Dolokhov made use of in his gambling transactions, and Makarin, a
 retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had an unbounded affection for Kuragin
were sitting at tea in Dolokhov's front room.  In his large study, the walls of w
hich were hung to the ceiling with Persian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolo
khov in a traveling cloak and high boots, at an open desk on which lay abacus and
 some bundles of paper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro
 from the room where the witnesses were sitting, through the study to the room be
hind, where his French valet and others were packing the last of his things. Dolo
khov was counting the money and noting something down.  "Well," he said, "Khvosti
kov must have two thousand."  "Give it to him, then," said Anatole.  "Makarka" th
eir name for Makarin "will go through fire and water for you for nothing. So here
 are our accounts all settled," said Dolokhov, showing him the memorandum. "Is th
at right?"  "Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening to Dolokh
ov and looking straight before him with a smile that did not leave his face.  Dol
okhov banged down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with an ironic smile 
 "Do you know? You'd really better drop it all. There's still time!"  "Fool," ret
orted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you only knew... it's the devil knows wha
t!"  "No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speaking seriously. It's no j
oke, this plot you've hatched."  "What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said
 Anatole, making a grimace. "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he l
eft the room.  Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole ha
d gone out.  "You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm not joking, I'm talking 
sense. Come here, come here!"  Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to
 give him his attention and evidently submitting to him involuntarily.  "Now list
en to me. I'm telling you this for the last time. Why should I joke about it? Did
 I hinder you? Who arranged everything for you? Who found the priest and got the 
passport? Who raised the money? I did it all."  "Well, thank you for it. Do you t
hink I am not grateful?" And Anatole sighed and embraced Dolokhov.  "I helped you
, but all the same I must tell you the truth it is a dangerous business, and if y
ou think about ita stupid business. Well, you'll carry her offall right! Will the
y let it stop at that? It will come out that you're already married. Why, they'll
 have you in the criminal court...."  "Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculate
d and again made a grimace. "Didn't I explain to you? What?" And Anatole, with th
e partiality dullwitted people have for any conclusion they have reached by their
 own reasoning, repeated the argument he had already put to Dolokhov a hundred ti
mes. "Didn't I explain to you that I have come to this conclusion if this marriag
e is invalid," he went on, crooking one finger, "then I have nothing to answer fo
r but if it is valid, no matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it. Isn't
 that so? And don't talk to me, don't, don't."  "Seriously, you'd better drop it!
 You'll only get yourself into a mess!"  "Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, cl
utching his hair, left the room, but returned at once and dropped into an armchai
r in front of Dolokhov with his feet turned under him. "It's the very devil! What
? Feel how it beats!" He took Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart. "What a fo
ot, my dear fellow! What a glance! A goddess!" he added in French. "What?"  Dolok
hov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyes looked at himevid
ently wishing to get some more amusement out of him.  "Well and when the money's 
gone, what then?"  "What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a th
ought of the future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But why talk nonsense!
" He glanced at his watch. "It's time!"  Anatole went into the back room.  "Now t
hen! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to the servants.  Dolokhov put aw
ay the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bring something for them to eat
 and drink before the journey, and went into the room where Khvostikov and Makari
n were sitting.  Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and sm
iling pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself.  "Come and
 eat something. Have a drink!" Dolokhov shouted to him from the other room.  "I d
on't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile.  "Come! Balaga is here."  An
atole rose and went into the dining room. Balaga was a famous troyka driver who h
ad known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and had given them good service with
 his troykas. More than once when Anatole's regiment was stationed at Tver he had
 taken him from Tver in the evening, brought him to Moscow by daybreak, and drive
n him back again the next night. More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape
 when pursued. More than once he had driven them through the town with gypsies an
d "ladykins" as he called the cocottes. More than once in their service he had ru
n over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets of Moscow and had always bee
n protected from the consequences by "my gentlemen" as he called them. He had rui
ned more than one horse in their service. More than once they had beaten him, and
 more than once they had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira, which he loved 
and he knew more than one thing about each of them which would long ago have sent
 an ordinary man to Siberia. They often called Balaga into their orgies and made 
him drink and dance at the gypsies', and more than one thousand rubles of their m
oney had passed through his hands. In their service he risked his skin and his li
fe twenty times a year, and in their service had lost more horses than the money 
he had from them would buy. But he liked them liked that mad driving at twelve mi
les an hour, liked upsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at
 full gallop through the Moscow streets. He liked to hear those wild, tipsy shout
s behind him "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible to go any faster. He liked 
giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant who, more dead than alive, was 
already hurrying out of his way. "Real gentlemen!" he considered them.  Anatole a
nd Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving and because he liked the th
ings they liked. With others Balaga bargained, charging twentyfive rubles for a t
wo hours' drive, and rarely drove himself, generally letting his young men do so.
 But with "his gentlemen" he always drove himself and never demanded anything for
 his work. Only a couple of times a yearwhen he knew from their valets that they 
had money in handhe would turn up of a morning quite sober and with a deep bow wo
uld ask them to help him. The gentlemen always made him sit down.  "Do help me ou
t, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," he would say. "I am quite out of
 horses. Let me have what you can to go to the fair."  And Anatole and Dolokhov, 
when they had money, would give him a thousand or a couple of thousand rubles.  B
alaga was a fairhaired, short, and snubnosed peasant of about twentyseven redface
d, with a particularly red thick neck, glittering little eyes, and a small beard.
 He wore a fine, darkblue, silklined cloth coat over a sheepskin.  On entering th
e room now he crossed himself, turning toward the front corner of the room, and w
ent up to Dolokhov, holding out a small, black hand.  "Theodore Ivanych!" he said
, bowing.  "How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!"  "Good day, your excellency!
" he said, again holding out his hand to Anatole who had just come in.  "I say, B
alaga," said Anatole, putting his hands on the man's shoulders, "do you care for 
me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service.... What horses have you come with? Eh?"  "As
 your messenger ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaga.  "Well, listen, Ba
laga! Drive all three to death but get me there in three hours. Eh?"  "When they 
are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink.  "Mind, I'll smash your f
ace in! Don't make jokes!" cried Anatole, suddenly rolling his eyes.  "Why joke?"
 said the driver, laughing. "As if I'd grudge my gentlemen anything! As fast as e
ver the horses can gallop, so fast we'll go!"  "Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit dow
n."  "Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov.  "I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych."  "Sit down 
nonsense! Have a drink!" said Anatole, and filled a large glass of Madeira for hi
m.  The driver's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine. After refusing it for ma
nners' sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silk handkerchief he took
 out of his cap.  "And when are we to start, your excellency?"  "Well..." Anatole
 looked at his watch. "We'll start at once. Mind, Balaga! You'll get there in tim
e? Eh?"  "That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we be there in
 time?" replied Balaga. "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven hours? I think you re
member that, your excellency?"  "Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," s
aid Anatole, smilingly at the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed raptu
rously at him with wideopen eyes. "Will you believe it, Makarka, it took one's br
eath away, the rate we flew. We came across a train of loaded sleighs and drove r
ight over two of them. Eh?"  "Those were horses!" Balaga continued the tale. "Tha
t time I'd harnessed two young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went o
n, turning to Dolokhov. "Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, those animals fle
w forty miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands grew numb in the sharp frost so 
that I threw down the reins'Catch hold yourself, your excellency!' says I, and I 
just tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh and sprawled there. It wasn't a case of 
urging them on, there was no holding them in till we reached the place. The devil
s took us there in three hours! Only the near one died of it."      CHAPTER XVII 
  Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing a fur coa
t girt with a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntily set on one side and very beco
ming to his handsome face. Having looked in a mirror, and standing before Dolokho
v in the same pose he had assumed before it, he lifted a glass of wine.  "Well, g
oodby, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!" said Anatole. "Well, com
rades and friends..." he considered for a moment "...of my youth, farewell!" he s
aid, turning to Makarin and the others.  Though they were all going with him, Ana
tole evidently wished to make something touching and solemn out of this address t
o his comrades. He spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slight
ly swayed one leg.  "All take glasses you too, Balaga. Well, comrades and friends
 of my youth, we've had our fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, when shall 
we meet again? I am going abroad. We have had a good timenow farewell, lads! To o
ur health! Hurrah!..." he cried, and emptying his glass flung it on the floor.  "
To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, and wiped his mouth with
 his handkerchief.  Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.  "Ah, Prince
, how sorry I am to part from you!  "Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole.  Balaga 
was about to leave the room.  "No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door we have fi
rst to sit down. That's the way."  They shut the door and all sat down.  "Now, qu
ick march, lads!" said Anatole, rising.  Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabret
ache and saber, and they all went out into the vestibule.  "And where's the fur c
loak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Ignatka! Go to Matrena Matrevna and ask her for the 
sable cloak. I have heard what elopements are like," continued Dolokhov with a wi
nk. "Why, she'll rush out more dead than alive just in the things she is wearing 
if you delay at all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she's frozen in
 a minute and must go backbut you wrap the fur cloak round her first thing and ca
rry her to the sleigh."  The valet brought a woman's foxlined cloak.  "Fool, I to
ld you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" he shouted so that his voice rang
 far through the rooms.  A handsome, slim, and palefaced gypsy girl with glitteri
ng black eyes and curly blueblack hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a sable
 mantle on her arm.  "Here, I don't grudge ittake it!" she said, evidently afraid
 of her master and yet regretful of her cloak.  Dolokhov, without answering, took
 the cloak, threw it over Matrena, and wrapped her up in it.  "That's the way," s
aid Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the collar up round her head, leaving 
only a little of the face uncovered. "And then so, do you see?" and he pushed Ana
tole's head forward to meet the gap left by the collar, through which Matrena's b
rilliant smile was seen.  "Well, goodby, Matrena," said Anatole, kissing her. "Ah
, my revels here are over. Remember me to Steshka. There, goodby! Goodby, Matrena
, wish me luck!"  "Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!" said Matrena in he
r gypsy accent.  Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers
 were holding the horses. Balaga took his seat in the front one and holding his e
lbows high arranged the reins deliberately. Anatole and Dolokhov got in with him.
 Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated themselves in the other sleigh.  "Well, 
are you ready?" asked Balaga.  "Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands
, and the troyka tore down the Nikitski Boulevard.  "Tproo! Get out of the way! H
i!... Tproo!..." The shouting of Balaga and of the sturdy young fellow seated on 
the box was all that could be heard. On the Arbat Square the troyka caught agains
t a carriage something cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along the 
Arbat Street.  After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began 
to rein in, and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old Konyusheny Street
.  The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatole and Dol
okhov went along the pavement. When they reached the gate Dolokhov whistled. The 
whistle was answered, and a maidservant ran out.  "Come into the courtyard or you
'll be seen she'll come out directly," said she.  Dolokhov stayed by the gate. An
atole followed the maid into the courtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into th
e porch.  He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman.  "Come to t
he mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass, intercepting any retreat
.  "To what Mistress? Who are you?" asked Anatole in a breathless whisper.  "Kind
ly step in, my orders are to bring you in."  "Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokh
ov. "Betrayed! Back!"  Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicke
t gate and was struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With a 
last desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and when Anatole ran back
 seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran back with him to t
he troyka.      CHAPTER XVIII   Marya Dmitrievna, having found Sonya weeping in t
he corridor, made her confess everything, and intercepting the note to Natasha sh
e read it and went into Natasha's room with it in her hand.  "You shameless goodf
ornothing!" said she. "I won't hear a word."  Pushing back Natasha who looked at 
her with astonished but tearless eyes, she locked her in and having given orders 
to the yard porter to admit the persons who would be coming that evening, but not
 to let them out again, and having told the footman to bring them up to her, she 
seated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors.  When Gabriel came to 
inform her that the men who had come had run away again, she rose frowning, and c
lasping her hands behind her paced through the rooms a long time considering what
 she should do. Toward midnight she went to Natasha's room fingering the key in h
er pocket. Sonya was sitting sobbing in the corridor. "Marya Dmitrievna, for God'
s sake let me in to her!" she pleaded, but Marya Dmitrievna unlocked the door and
 went in without giving her an answer.... "Disgusting, abominable... In my house.
.. horrid girl, hussy! I'm only sorry for her father!" thought she, trying to res
train her wrath. "Hard as it may be, I'll tell them all to hold their tongues and
 will hide it from the count." She entered the room with resolute steps. Natasha 
lying on the sofa, her head hidden in her hands, and she did not stir. She was in
 just the same position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her.  "A nice girl! Ve
ry nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranging meetings with lovers in my house! It'
s no use pretending you listen when I speak to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched
 her arm. "Listen when I speak! You've disgraced yourself like the lowest of huss
ies. I'd treat you differently, but I'm sorry for your father, so I will conceal 
it."  Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved with noisele
ss, convulsive sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievna glanced round at Sonya and
 seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha.  "It's lucky for him that he escaped 
me but I'll find him!" she said in her rough voice. "Do you hear what I am saying
 or not?" she added.  She put her large hand under Natasha's face and turned it t
oward her. Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natasha 
looked. Her eyes were dry and glistening, her lips compressed, her cheeks sunken.
  "Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!" she muttered, wrenching herse
lf from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious effort and sinking down again int
o her former position.  "Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "I wish for your good. 
Lie still, stay like that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won't tell you h
ow guilty you are. You know that yourself. But when your father comes back tomorr
ow what am I to tell him? Eh?"  Again Natasha's body shook with sobs.  "Suppose h
e finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?"  "I have no betrothed I have 
refused him!" cried Natasha.  "That's all the same," continued Marya Dmitrievna. 
"If they hear of this, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if h
e challenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?"  "Oh, let me be! Why have
 you interfered at all? Why? Why? Who asked you to?" shouted Natasha, raising her
self on the sofa and looking malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna.  "But what did you 
want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, growing angry again. "Were you kept under lock and
 key? Who hindered his coming to the house? Why carry you off as if you were some
 gypsy singing girl?... Well, if he had carried you off... do you think they woul
dn't have found him? Your father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's a scoun
drel, a wretchthat's a fact!"  "He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha 
getting up. "If you hadn't interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? 
Sonya, why?... Go away!"  And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence w
ith which people bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned. Mary
a Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out  "Go away! Go away! You all
 hate and despise me!" and she threw herself back on the sofa.  Marya Dmitrievna 
went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on her that it must all be kept 
from her father and assuring her that nobody would know anything about it if only
 Natasha herself would undertake to forget it all and not let anyone see that som
ething had happened. Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but she g
rew cold and had a shivering fit. Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head, c
overed her with two quilts, and herself brought her some limeflower water, but Na
tasha did not respond to her.  "Well, let her sleep," said Marya Dmitrievna as sh
e went out of the room supposing Natasha to be asleep.  But Natasha was not aslee
p with pale face and fixed wideopen eyes she looked straight before her. All that
 night she did not sleep or weep and did not speak to Sonya who got up and went t
o her several times.  Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow 
in time for lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits the affair with
 the purchaser was going on satisfactorily, and there was nothing to keep him any
 longer in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed. Marya Dmitrievna met hi
m and told him that Natasha had been very unwell the day before and that they had
 sent for the doctor, but that she was better now. Natasha had not left her room 
that morning. With compressed and parched lips and dry fixed eyes, she sat at the
 window, uneasily watching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round
 at anyone who entered the room. She was evidently expecting news of him and that
 he would come or would write to her.  When the count came to see her she turned 
anxiously round at the sound of a man's footstep, and then her face resumed its c
old and malevolent expression. She did not even get up to greet him. "What is the
 matter with you, my angel? Are you ill?" asked the count.  After a moment's sile
nce Natasha answered "Yes, ill."  In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as to
 why she was so dejected and whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she 
assured him that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry. Marya Dmitrievn
a confirmed Natasha's assurances that nothing had happened. From the pretense of 
illness, from his daughter's distress, and by the embarrassed faces of Sonya and 
Marya Dmitrievna, the count saw clearly that something had gone wrong during his 
absence, but it was so terrible for him to think that anything disgraceful had ha
ppened to his beloved daughter, and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity, t
hat he avoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularly ha
d happened and he was only dissatisfied that her indisposition delayed their retu
rn to the country.      CHAPTER XIX   From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pie
rre had been intending to go away somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after
 the Rostovs came to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carr
y out his intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich's widow, who had lo
ng since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceased husband's.  Whe
n he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Marya Dmitrievna asking h
im to come and see her on a matter of great importance relating to Andrew Bolkons
ki and his betrothed. Pierre had been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him t
hat his feeling for her was stronger than a married man's should be for his frien
d's fiancee. Yet some fate constantly threw them together.  "What can have happen
ed? And what can they want with me?" thought he as he dressed to go to Marya Dmit
rievna's. "If only Prince Andrew would hurry up and come and marry her!" thought 
he on his way to the house.  On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to
 him.  "Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head. In a sl
eigh drawn by two gray trottinghorses that were bespattering the dashboard with s
now, Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashed past. Anatole was sitting 
upright in the classic pose of military dandies, the lower part of his face hidde
n by his beaver collar and his head slightly bent. His face was fresh and rosy, h
is whiteplumed hat, tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and pomaded hair bes
prinkled with powdery snow.  "Yes, indeed, that's a true sage," thought Pierre. "
He sees nothing beyond the pleasure of the moment, nothing troubles him and so he
 is always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I give to be like him!"
 he thought enviously.  In Marya Dmitrievna's anteroom the footman who helped him
 off with his fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.  
When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at the window, with a
 thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at him, frowned, and left the r
oom with an expression of cold dignity.  "What has happened?" asked Pierre, enter
ing Marya Dmitrievna's room.  "Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fiftyeight
 years have I lived in this world and never known anything so disgraceful!"  And 
having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him, Marya Dmitrievna
 informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrew without her parents' knowled
ge and that the cause of this was Anatole Kuragin into whose society Pierre's wif
e had thrown her and with whom Natasha had tried to elope during her father's abs
ence, in order to be married secretly.  Pierre raised his shoulders and listened 
openmouthed to what was told him, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Pri
nce Andrew's deeply loved affianced wifethe same Natasha Rostova who used to be s
o charmingshould give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was already secretly
 married as Pierre knew, and should be so in love with him as to agree to run awa
y with him, was something Pierre could not conceive and could not imagine.  He co
uld not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha, whom he had known fr
om a child, with this new conception of her baseness, folly, and cruelty. He thou
ght of his wife. "They are all alike!" he said to himself, reflecting that he was
 not the only man unfortunate enough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he piti
ed Prince Andrew to the point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, an
d the more he pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even with
 disgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom with such a look
 of cold dignity. He did not know that Natasha's soul was overflowing with despai
r, shame, and humiliation, and that it was not her fault that her face happened t
o assume an expression of calm dignity and severity.  "But how get married?" said
 Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna. "He could not marryhe is married!"  "Thin
gs get worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna. "A nice youth! What
 a scoundrel! And she's expecting himexpecting him since yesterday. She must be t
old! Then at least she won't go on expecting him."  After hearing the details of 
Anatole's marriage from Pierre, and giving vent to her anger against Anatole in w
ords of abuse, Marya Dmitrievna told Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afr
aid that the count or Bolkonski, who might arrive at any moment, if they knew of 
this affair which she hoped to hide from them might challenge Anatole to a duel, 
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brotherinlaw in her name to leave Mosc
ow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again. Pierreonly now realizing the da
nger to the old count, Nicholas, and Prince Andrewpromised to do as she wished. H
aving briefly and exactly explained her wishes to him, she let him go to the draw
ing room.  "Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothing either,"
 she said. "And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! And stay to di
nner if you care to!" she called after Pierre.  Pierre met the old count, who see
med nervous and upset. That morning Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bo
lkonski.  "Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "What troubles
 one has with these girls without their mother! I do so regret having come here..
.. I will be frank with you. Have you heard she has broken off her engagement wit
hout consulting anybody? It's true this engagement never was much to my liking. O
f course he is an excellent man, but still, with his father's disapproval they wo
uldn't have been happy, and Natasha won't lack suitors. Still, it has been going 
on so long, and to take such a step without father's or mother's consent! And now
 she's ill, and God knows what! It's hard, Count, hard to manage daughters in the
ir mother's absence...."  Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to c
hange the subject, but the count returned to his troubles.  Sonya entered the roo
m with an agitated face.  "Natasha is not quite well she's in her room and would 
like to see you. Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come."  "Ye
s, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to send him a messag
e," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it all was!"  And clutching the 
spare gray locks on his temples the count left the room.  When Marya Dmitrievna t
old Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha did not wish to believe it and insi
sted on having it confirmed by Pierre himself. Sonya told Pierre this as she led 
him along the corridor to Natasha's room.  Natasha, pale and stern, was sitting b
eside Marya Dmitrievna, and her eyes, glittering feverishly, met Pierre with a qu
estioning look the moment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazed fi
xedly at him, and her look asked only one thing was he a friend, or like the othe
rs an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently did not exist for h
er.  "He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre and addres
sing Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the truth."  Natasha looked f
rom one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal looks at the approaching dogs
 and sportsmen.  "Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feel
ing of pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do, "whether it is true 
or not should make no difference to you, because..."  "Then it is not true that h
e's married!"  "Yes, it is true."  "Has he been married long?" she asked. "On you
r honor?..."  Pierre gave his word of honor.  "Is he still here?" she asked, quic
kly.  "Yes, I have just seen him."  She was evidently unable to speak and made a 
sign with her hands that they should leave her alone.      CHAPTER XX   Pierre di
d not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away at once. He drove through 
the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at the thought of whom now the blood rushed to 
his heart and he felt a difficulty in breathing. He was not at the ice hills, nor
 at the gypsies', nor at Komoneno's. Pierre drove to the Club. In the Club all wa
s going on as usual. The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting abou
t in groups they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news. The footman having gr
eeted him, knowing his habits and his acquaintances, told him there was a place l
eft for him in the small dining room and that Prince Michael Zakharych was in the
 library, but Paul Timofeevich had not yet arrived. One of Pierre's acquaintances
, while they were talking about the weather, asked if he had heard of Kuragin's a
bduction of Rostova which was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre laug
hed and said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked eve
ryone about Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, and another that he wa
s coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see this calm, indifferent crowd of
 people unaware of what was going on in his soul. He paced through the ballroom, 
waited till everyone had come, and as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for 
dinner but drove home.  Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with
 Dolokhov, consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It seemed 
to him essential to see Natasha. In the evening he drove to his sister's to discu
ss with her how to arrange a meeting. When Pierre returned home after vainly hunt
ing all over Moscow, his valet informed him that Prince Anatole was with the coun
tess. The countess' drawing room was full of guests.  Pierre without greeting his
 wife whom he had not seen since his returnat that moment she was more repulsive 
to him than everentered the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him.  "Ah,
 Pierre," said the countess going up to her husband. "You don't know what a pligh
t our Anatole..."  She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of her husband's hea
d, in his glowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of that ra
ge and strength which she knew and had herself experienced after his duel with Do
lokhov.  "Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife. "Anato
le, come with me! I must speak to you," he added in French.  Anatole glanced roun
d at his sister and rose submissively, ready to follow Pierre. Pierre, taking him
 by the arm, pulled him toward himself and was leading him from the room.  "If yo
u allow yourself in my drawing room..." whispered Helene, but Pierre did not repl
y and went out of the room.  Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but 
his face betrayed anxiety.  Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and a
ddressed Anatole without looking at him.  "You promised Countess Rostova to marry
 her and were about to elope with her, is that so?"  "Mon cher," answered Anatole
 their whole conversation was in French, "I don't consider myself bound to answer
 questions put to me in that tone."  Pierre's face, already pale, became distorte
d by fury. He seized Anatole by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and s
hook him from side to side till Anatole's face showed a sufficient degree of terr
or.  "When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre.  "Come now, t
his is stupid. What?" said Anatole, fingering a button of his collar that had bee
n wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.  "You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, 
and I don't know what deprives me from the pleasure of smashing your head with th
is!" said Pierre, expressing himself so artificially because he was talking Frenc
h.  He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly, but at once put it b
ack in its place.  "Did you promise to marry her?"  "I... I didn't think of it. I
 never promised, because..."  Pierre interrupted him.  "Have you any letters of h
ers? Any letters?" he said, moving toward Anatole.  Anatole glanced at him and im
mediately thrust his hand into his pocket and drew out his pocketbook.  Pierre to
ok the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a table that stood in his way
, threw himself on the sofa.  "I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre
 in answer to a frightened gesture of Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, a
s if repeating a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he continued after a short pause,
 again rising and again pacing the room, "tomorrow you must get out of Moscow."  
"But how can I?..."  "Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you m
ust never breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova. I k
now I can't prevent your doing so, but if you have a spark of conscience..." Pier
re paced the room several times in silence.  Anatole sat at a table frowning and 
biting his lips.  "After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure ther
e is such a thing as other people's happiness and peace, and that you are ruining
 a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself! Amuse yourself with women like my
 wifewith them you are within your rights, for they know what you want of them. T
hey are armed against you by the same experience of debauchery but to promise a m
aid to marry her... to deceive, to kidnap.... Don't you understand that it is as 
mean as beating an old man or a child?..."  Pierre paused and looked at Anatole n
o longer with an angry but with a questioning look.  "I don't know about that, eh
?" said Anatole, growing more confident as Pierre mastered his wrath. "I don't kn
ow that and don't want to," he said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight trem
or of his lower jaw, "but you have used such words to me'mean' and so onwhich as 
a man of honor I can't allow anyone to use."  Pierre glanced at him with amazemen
t, unable to understand what he wanted.  "Though it was teteatete," Anatole conti
nued, "still I can't..."  "Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically. 
 "You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to do as you wish
, eh?"  "I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you to forg
ive me." Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. "And if you require mo
ney for your journey..."  Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and cringin
g smile, which Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.  "Oh, vile and hear
tless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.  Next day Anatole left for Petersb
urg.      CHAPTER XXI   Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the ful
fillment of her wish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow. The whole house
 was in a state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill, having, as Marya Dm
itrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself the night after she had been told t
hat Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthily procured. After swa
llowing a little she had been so frightened that she woke Sonya and told her what
 she had done. The necessary antidotes had been administered in time and she was 
now out of danger, though still so weak that it was out of the question to move h
er to the country, and so the countess had been sent for. Pierre saw the distract
ed count, and Sonya, who had a tearstained face, but he could not see Natasha.  P
ierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about the attempte
d abduction of Rostova. He resolutely denied these rumors, assuring everyone that
 nothing had happened except that his brotherinlaw had proposed to her and been r
efused. It seemed to Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and 
reestablish Natasha's reputation.  He was awaiting Prince Andrew's return with dr
ead and went every day to the old prince's for news of him.  Old Prince Bolkonski
 heard all the rumors current in the town from Mademoiselle Bourienne and had rea
d the note to Princess Mary in which Natasha had broken off her engagement. He se
emed in better spirits than usual and awaited his son with great impatience.  Som
e days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note from Prince Andrew, infor
ming him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him.  As soon as he reached
 Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his father Natasha's note to Princess Ma
ry breaking off her engagement Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princ
ess Mary and given it to the old prince, and he heard from him the story of Natas
ha's elopement, with additions.  Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pie
rre came to see him next morning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost
 the same state as Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing ro
om to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some intrigue 
going on in Petersburg. The old prince's voice and another now and then interrupt
ed him. Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre. She sighed, looking toward the doo
r of the room where Prince Andrew was, evidently intending to express her sympath
y with his sorrow, but Pierre saw by her face that she was glad both at what had 
happened and at the way her brother had taken the news of Natasha's faithlessness
.  "He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will not let him exp
ress his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better, than I expected.
 Evidently it had to be...."  "But is it possible that all is really ended?" aske
d Pierre.  Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not understand 
how he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. Prince Andrew, grea
tly changed and plainly in better health, but with a fresh horizontal wrinkle bet
ween his brows, stood in civilian dress facing his father and Prince Meshcherski,
 warmly disputing and vigorously gesticulating. The conversation was about Speran
skithe news of whose sudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow. 
 "Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him a month a
go," Prince Andrew was saying, "and by those who were unable to understand his ai
ms. To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw on him all the blame of other 
men's mistakes is very easy, but I maintain that if anything good has been accomp
lished in this reign it was done by him, by him alone."  He paused at the sight o
f Pierre. His face quivered and immediately assumed a vindictive expression.  "Po
sterity will do him justice," he concluded, and at once turned to Pierre.  "Well,
 how are you? Still getting stouter?" he said with animation, but the new wrinkle
 on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am well," he said in answer to Pierre's questi
on, and smiled.  To Pierre that smile said plainly "I am well, but my health is n
ow of no use to anyone."  After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from 
the Polish frontier, about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre, and 
about M. Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his son's tutor, Prince
 Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about Speranski which was still g
oing on between the two old men.  "If there were treason, or proofs of secret rel
ations with Napoleon, they would have been made public," he said with warmth and 
haste. "I do not, and never did, like Speranski personally, but I like justice!" 
 Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too familiar, 
to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters in order to stifle 
thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate. When Prince Meshcherski had l
eft, Prince Andrew took Pierre's arm and asked him into the room that had been as
signed him. A bed had been made up there, and some open portmanteaus and trunks s
tood about. Prince Andrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he 
drew a packet wrapped in paper. He did it all silently and very quickly. He stood
 up and coughed. His face was gloomy and his lips compressed.  "Forgive me for tr
oubling you..."  Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and
 his broad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated Prince And
rew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued  "I have rece
ived a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports of your brotherinlaw 
having sought her hand, or something of that kind. Is that true?"  "Both true and
 untrue," Pierre began but Prince Andrew interrupted him.  "Here are her letters 
and her portrait," said he.  He took the packet from the table and handed it to P
ierre.  "Give this to the countess... if you see her."  "She is very ill," said P
ierre.  "Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Prince Kuragin?" he ad
ded quickly.  "He left long ago. She has been at death's door."  "I much regret h
er illness," said Prince Andrew and he smiled like his father, coldly, maliciousl
y, and unpleasantly.  "So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with 
his hand?" said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.  "He could not marry
, for he was married already," said Pierre.  Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, 
again reminding one of his father.  "And where is your brotherinlaw now, if I may
 ask?" he said.  "He has gone to Peters... But I don't know," said Pierre.  "Well
, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countess Rostova that she was and
 is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is good."  Pierre took the packet
. Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whether he had something more to say, o
r waiting to see if Pierre would say anything, looked fixedly at him.  "I say, do
 you remember our discussion in Petersburg?" asked Pierre, "about..."  "Yes," ret
urned Prince Andrew hastily. "I said that a fallen woman should be forgiven, but 
I didn't say I could forgive her. I can't."  "But can this be compared...?" said 
Pierre.  Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply "Yes, ask her hand again
, be magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very noble, but I am unable to
 follow in that gentleman's footsteps. If you wish to be my friend never speak to
 me of that... of all that! Well, goodby. So you'll give her the packet?"  Pierre
 left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.  The old man seemed 
livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same as always, but beneath her sympat
hy for her brother, Pierre noticed her satisfaction that the engagement had been 
broken off. Looking at them Pierre realized what contempt and animosity they all 
felt for the Rostovs, and that it was impossible in their presence even to mentio
n the name of her who could give up Prince Andrew for anyone else.  At dinner the
 talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becoming evident. Prince Andre
w talked incessantly, arguing now with his father, now with the Swiss tutor Dessa
lles, and showing an unnatural animation, the cause of which Pierre so well under
stood.      CHAPTER XXII   That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfi
ll the commission entrusted to him. Natasha was in bed, the count at the Club, an
d Pierre, after giving the letters to Sonya, went to Marya Dmitrievna who was int
erested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minutes later Sonya cam
e to Marya Dmitrievna.  "Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said 
she.  "But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not been tidied 
up."  "No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room," said Sonya.  Marya Dm
itrievna only shrugged her shoulders.  "When will her mother come? She has worrie
d me to death! Now mind, don't tell her everything!" said she to Pierre. "One has
n't the heart to scold her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied."  
Natasha was standing in the middle of the drawing room, emaciated, with a pale se
t face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to find her. When he appeare
d at the door she grew flurried, evidently undecided whether to go to meet him or
 to wait till he came up.  Pierre hastened to her. He thought she would give him 
her hand as usual but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her ar
ms hanging lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she went to the 
middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a different expression of face.  "
Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was your friendis your fr
iend," she corrected herself. It seemed to her that everything that had once been
 must now be different. "He told me once to apply to you..."  Pierre sniffed as h
e looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he had reproached her in his heart 
and tried to despise her, but he now felt so sorry for her that there was no room
 in his soul for reproach.  "He is here now tell him... to for... forgive me!" Sh
e stopped and breathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears.  "Yes... I wil
l tell him," answered Pierre "but..."  He did not know what to say.  Natasha was 
evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might think she had meant.  "No, I k
now all is over," she said hurriedly. "No, that can never be. I'm only tormented 
by the wrong I have done him. Tell him only that I beg him to forgive, forgive, f
orgive me for everything...."  She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.  A 
sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart.  "I will tell 
him, I will tell him everything once more," said Pierre. "But... I should like to
 know one thing...."  "Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked.  "I should like to know,
 did you love..." Pierre did not know how to refer to Anatole and flushed at the 
thought of him"did you love that bad man?"  "Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "
But I don't know, don't know at all...."  She began to cry and a still greater se
nse of pity, tenderness, and love welled up in Pierre. He felt the tears trickle 
under his spectacles and hoped they would not be noticed.  "We won't speak of it 
any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his gentle, cordial tone suddenly seemed ver
y strange to Natasha.  "We won't speak of it, my dearI'll tell him everything but
 one thing I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice, or
 simply to open your heart to someonenot now, but when your mind is clearer think
 of me!" He took her hand and kissed it. "I shall be happy if it's in my power...
"  Pierre grew confused.  "Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" excla
imed Natasha and turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.  He knew he 
had something more to say to her. But when he said it he was amazed at his own wo
rds.  "Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her.  "Before
 me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and selfabasement.   "All ov
er?" he repeated. "If I were not myself, but the handsomest, cleverest, and best 
man in the world, and were free, I would this moment ask on my knees for your han
d and your love!"  For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitu
de and tenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.  Pierre too w
hen she had gone almost ran into the anteroom, restraining tears of tenderness an
d joy that choked him, and without finding the sleeves of his fur cloak threw it 
on and got into his sleigh.  "Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman.
  "Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I go now? Surely not to the Club o
r to pay calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in comparison with this feel
ing of tenderness and love he experienced in comparison with that softened, grate
ful, last look she had given him through her tears.  "Home!" said Pierre, and des
pite twentytwo degrees of frost Fahrenheit he threw open the bearskin cloak from 
his broad chest and inhaled the air with joy.  It was clear and frosty. Above the
 dirty, illlit streets, above the black roofs, stretched the dark starry sky. Onl
y looking up at the sky did Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were 
all mundane things compared with the heights to which his soul had just been rais
ed. At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of dark starry sky pre
sented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it, above the Prechistenka Bou
levard, surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by stars but distinguished from the
m all by its nearness to the earth, its white light, and its long uplifted tail, 
shone the enormous and brilliant comet of 1812the comet which was said to portend
 all kinds of woes and the end of the world. In Pierre, however, that comet with 
its long luminous tail aroused no feeling of fear. On the contrary he gazed joyfu
lly, his eyes moist with tears, at this bright comet which, having traveled in it
s orbit with inconceivable velocity through immeasurable space, seemed suddenlyli
ke an arrow piercing the earthto remain fixed in a chosen spot, vigorously holdin
g its tail erect, shining and displaying its white light amid countless other sci
ntillating stars. It seemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was
 passing in his own softened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a new life.  
    BOOK NINE 1812      CHAPTER I   From the close of the year 1811 intensified a
rming and concentrating of the forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these 
forcesmillions of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the armymoved fro
m the west eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward which since 1811 Russian for
ces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812, the forces of Western
 Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began, that is, an event took place 
opposed to human reason and to human nature. Millions of men perpetrated against 
one another such innumerable crimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts, forgeries, issu
es of false money, burglaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in whole centuries a
re not recorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but which those
 who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes.  What produced th
is extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes? The historians tell us with na
ive assurance that its causes were the wrongs inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg,
 the nonobservance of the Continental System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmn
ess of Alexander, the mistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.  Consequently, it 
would only have been necessary for Metternich, Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between
 a levee and an evening party, to have taken proper pains and written a more adro
it note, or for Napoleon to have written to Alexander "My respected Brother, I co
nsent to restore the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg"and there would have been no 
war.  We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries. It na
turally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England's intrigues as in f
act he said on the island of St. Helena. It naturally seemed to members of the En
glish Parliament that the cause of the war was Napoleon's ambition to the Duke of
 Oldenburg, that the cause of the war was the violence done to him to businessmen
 that the cause of the war was the Continental System which was ruining Europe to
 the generals and old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessit
y of giving them employment to the legitimists of that day that it was the need o
f reestablishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of that time that it
 all resulted from the fact that the alliance between Russia and Austria in 1809 
had not been sufficiently well concealed from Napoleon, and from the awkward word
ing of Memorandum No. 178. It is natural that these and a countless and infinite 
quantity of other reasons, the number depending on the endless diversity of point
s of view, presented themselves to the men of that day but to us, to posterity wh
o view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and perceive its plain and te
rrible meaning, these causes seem insufficient. To us it is incomprehensible that
 millions of Christian men killed and tortured each other either because Napoleon
 was ambitious or Alexander was firm, or because England's policy was astute or t
he Duke of Oldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp what connection such circumstances 
have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence why because the Duke was wron
ged, thousands of men from the other side of Europe killed and ruined the people 
of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them.  To us, their descendants, who ar
e not historians and are not carried away by the process of research and can ther
efore regard the event with unclouded common sense, an incalculable number of cau
ses present themselves. The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of
 them we find and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears to us equ
ally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance compared to the magn
itude of the events, and by its impotenceapart from the cooperation of all the ot
her coincident causesto occasion the event. To us, the wish or objection of this 
or that French corporal to serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleo
n's refusal to withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy of
 Oldenburg for had he not wished to serve, and had a second, a third, and a thous
andth corporal and private also refused, there would have been so many less men i
n Napoleon's army and the war could not have occurred.  Had Napoleon not taken of
fense at the demand that he should withdraw beyond the Vistula, and not ordered h
is troops to advance, there would have been no war but had all his sergeants obje
cted to serving a second term then also there could have been no war. Nor could t
here have been a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg
, and had Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not been an autocratic gover
nment in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a subsequent dictatorship and Empi
re, or all the things that produced the French Revolution, and so on. Without eac
h of these causes nothing could have happened. So all these causesmyriads of caus
escoincided to bring it about. And so there was no one cause for that occurrence,
 but it had to occur because it had to. Millions of men, renouncing their human f
eelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their fellows, just as so
me centuries previously hordes of men had come from the east to the west, slaying
 their fellows.  The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event 
seemed to hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was dr
awn into the campaign by lot or by conscription. This could not be otherwise, for
 in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander on whom the event seemed to dep
end should be carried out, the concurrence of innumerable circumstances was neede
d without any one of which the event could not have taken place. It was necessary
 that millions of men in whose hands lay the real powerthe soldiers who fired, or
 transported provisions and gunsshould consent to carry out the will of these wea
k individuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number of div
erse and complex causes.  We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanatio
n of irrational events that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do n
ot understand. The more we try to explain such events in history reasonably, the 
more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to us.  Each man lives for 
himself, using his freedom to attain his personal aims, and feels with his whole 
being that he can now do or abstain from doing this or that action but as soon as
 he has done it, that action performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevo
cable and belongs to history, in which it has not a free but a predestined signif
icance.  There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life, which
 is the more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental hive life in
 which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him.  Man lives consciously for him
self, but is an unconscious instrument in the attainment of the historic, univers
al, aims of humanity. A deed done is irrevocable, and its result coinciding in ti
me with the actions of millions of other men assumes an historic significance. Th
e higher a man stands on the social ladder, the more people he is connected with 
and the more power he has over others, the more evident is the predestination and
 inevitability of his every action.  "The king's heart is in the hands of the Lor
d."  A king is history's slave.  History, that is, the unconscious, general, hive
 life of mankind, uses every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own pu
rposes.  Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever that
 it depended on him, verser ou ne pas verser le sang de ses peuples *as Alexander
 expressed it in the last letter he wrote himhe had never been so much in the gri
p of inevitable laws, which compelled him, while thinking that he was acting on h
is own volition, to perform for the hive lifethat is to say, for historywhatever 
had to be performed.       * "To shed or not to shed the blood of his peoples."  
 The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and by the law 
of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and coordinated to produce th
at movement and war reproaches for the nonobservance of the Continental System, t
he Duke of Oldenburg's wrongs, the movement of troops into Prussiaundertaken as i
t seemed to Napoleon only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the French 
Emperor's love and habit of war coinciding with his people's inclinations, allure
ment by the grandeur of the preparations, and the expenditure on those preparatio
ns and the need of obtaining advantages to compensate for that expenditure, the i
ntoxicating honors he received in Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in 
the opinion of contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain pe
ace, but which only wounded the selflove of both sides, and millions of other cau
ses that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or coincided with it.
  When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of its attractio
n to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it is dried by the sun, becaus
e it grows heavier, because the wind shakes it, or because the boy standing below
 wants to eat it?  Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of cond
itions in which all vital organic and elemental events occur. And the botanist wh
o finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and so forth is e
qually right with the child who stands under the tree and says the apple fell bec
ause he wanted to eat it and prayed for it. Equally right or wrong is he who says
 that Napoleon went to Moscow because he wanted to, and perished because Alexande
r desired his destruction, and he who says that an undermined hill weighing a mil
lion tons fell because the last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattoc
k. In historic events the socalled great men are labels giving names to events, a
nd like labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself.  Ever
y act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, is in an histori
cal sense involuntary and is related to the whole course of history and predestin
ed from eternity.      CHAPTER II   On the twentyninth of May Napoleon left Dresd
en, where he had spent three weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, d
ukes, kings, and even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to the em
peror, kings, and princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kings and princes 
with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and diamonds of his ownthat is, w
hich he had taken from other kingsto the Empress of Austria, and having, as his h
istorian tells us, tenderly embraced the Empress Marie Louisewho regarded him as 
her husband, though he had left another wife in Parisleft her grieved by the part
ing which she seemed hardly able to bear. Though the diplomatists still firmly be
lieved in the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end, and though t
he Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander, calling him Monsieur mon
 frere, and sincerely assured him that he did not want war and would always love 
and honor himyet he set off to join his army, and at every station gave fresh ord
ers to accelerate the movement of his troops from west to east. He went in a trav
eling coach with six horses, surrounded by pages, aidesdecamp, and an escort, alo
ng the road to Posen, Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg. At each of these towns thous
ands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.  The army was moving from 
west to east, and relays of six horses carried him in the same direction. On the 
tenth of June, * coming up with the army, he spent the night in apartments prepar
ed for him on the estate of a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.       * Old
 style.   Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to the Niemen, and
, changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order to select a 
place for the crossing.  Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks les Cosaques an
d the widespreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow Mos
cou, la ville sainte, the capital of a realm such as the Scythia into which Alexa
nder the Great had marchedNapoleon unexpectedly, and contrary alike to strategic 
and diplomatic considerations, ordered an advance, and the next day his army bega
n to cross the Niemen.  Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out o
f his tent, which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, and 
looked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out of the Vilkavi
sski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown across the river. The troop
s, knowing of the Emperor's presence, were on the lookout for him, and when they 
caught sight of a figure in an overcoat and a cocked hat standing apart from his 
suite in front of his tent on the hill, they threw up their caps and shouted "Viv
e l'Empereur!" and one after another poured in a ceaseless stream out of the vast
 forest that had concealed them and, separating, flowed on and on by the three br
idges to the other side.  "Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand
 himself, things get hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! So the
se are the steppes of Asia! It's a nasty country all the same. Au revoir, Beauche
 I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir. Good luck!... Did you se
e the Emperor? Vive l'Empereur!... preur!If they make me Governor of India, Gerar
d, I'll make you Minister of Kashmirthat's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah! hurr
ah! hurrah! The Cossacksthose rascalssee how they run! Vive l'Empereur! There he 
is, do you see him? I've seen him twice, as I see you now. The little corporal...
 I saw him give the cross to one of the veterans.... Vive l'Empereur!" came the v
oices of men, old and young, of most diverse characters and social positions. On 
the faces of all was one common expression of joy at the commencement of the long
expected campaign and of rapture and devotion to the man in the gray coat who was
 standing on the hill.  On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Ar
ab horse was brought to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one of th
e bridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturous acclam
ations which he evidently endured only because it was impossible to forbid the so
ldiers to express their love of him by such shouting, but the shouting which acco
mpanied him everywhere disturbed him and distracted him from the military cares t
hat had occupied him from the time he joined the army. He rode across one of the 
swaying pontoon bridges to the farther side, turned sharply to the left, and gall
oped in the direction of Kovno, preceded by enraptured, mounted chasseurs of the 
Guard who, breathless with delight, galloped ahead to clear a path for him throug
h the troops. On reaching the broad river Viliya, he stopped near a regiment of P
olish Uhlans stationed by the river.  "Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, b
reaking their ranks and pressing against one another to see him.  Napoleon looked
 up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a log that lay on the bank. A
t a mute sign from him, a telescope was handed him which he rested on the back of
 a happy page who had run up to him, and he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he b
ecame absorbed in a map laid out on the logs. Without lifting his head he said so
mething, and two of his aidesdecamp galloped off to the Polish Uhlans.  "What? Wh
at did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlans when one of the aides
decamp rode up to them.  The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The
 colonel of the Polish Uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in his s
peech from excitement, asked the aidedecamp whether he would be permitted to swim
 the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford. In evident fear of refusal,
 like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, he begged to be allowed to s
wim across the river before the Emperor's eyes. The aidedecamp replied that proba
bly the Emperor would not be displeased at this excess of zeal.  As soon as the a
idedecamp had said this, the old mustached officer, with happy face and sparkling
 eyes, raised his saber, shouted "Vivat!" and, commanding the Uhlans to follow hi
m, spurred his horse and galloped into the river. He gave an angry thrust to his 
horse, which had grown restive under him, and plunged into the water, heading for
 the deepest part where the current was swift. Hundreds of Uhlans galloped in aft
er him. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of the stream,
 and the Uhlans caught hold of one another as they fell off their horses. Some of
 the horses were drowned and some of the men the others tried to swim on, some in
 the saddle and some clinging to their horses' manes. They tried to make their wa
y forward to the opposite bank and, though there was a ford one third of a mile a
way, were proud that they were swimming and drowning in this river under the eyes
 of the man who sat on the log and was not even looking at what they were doing. 
When the aidedecamp, having returned and choosing an opportune moment, ventured t
o draw the Emperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles to his person, the li
ttle man in the gray overcoat got up and, having summoned Berthier, began pacing 
up and down the bank with him, giving him instructions and occasionally glancing 
disapprovingly at the drowning Uhlans who distracted his attention.  For him it w
as no new conviction that his presence in any part of the world, from Africa to t
he steppes of Muscovy alike, was enough to dumfound people and impel them to insa
ne selfoblivion. He called for his horse and rode to his quarters.  Some forty Uh
lans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent to their assistance. The m
ajority struggled back to the bank from which they had started. The colonel and s
ome of his men got across and with difficulty clambered out on the further bank. 
And as soon as they had got out, in their soaked and streaming clothes, they shou
ted "Vivat!" and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but wher
e he no longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy.  That evening,
 between issuing one order that the forged Russian paper money prepared for use i
n Russia should be delivered as quickly as possible and another that a Saxon shou
ld be shot, on whom a letter containing information about the orders to the Frenc
h army had been found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel wh
o had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled in the Legion d'honneu
r of which Napoleon was himself the head.  Quos vult perdere dementat. *       * 
Those whom God wishes to destroy he drives mad.      CHAPTER III   The Emperor of
 Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vilna for more than a month, reviewing troops and
 holding maneuvers. Nothing was ready for the war that everyone expected and to p
repare for which the Emperor had come from Petersburg. There was no general plan 
of action. The vacillation between the various plans that were proposed had even 
increased after the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month. Each of the thr
ee armies had its own commander in chief, but there was no supreme commander of a
ll the forces, and the Emperor did not assume that responsibility himself.  The l
onger the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybodytired of waitingprepare
 for the war. All the efforts of those who surrounded the sovereign seemed direct
ed merely to making him spend his time pleasantly and forget that war was impendi
ng.  In June, after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates, by the cou
rtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the Polish aidesdecamp 
in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given for the Emperor by his aides
decamp. This idea was eagerly received. The Emperor gave his consent. The aidesde
camp collected money by subscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasin
g to the Emperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennigsen, being a landowne
r in the Vilna province, offered his country house for the fete, and the thirteen
th of June was fixed for a ball, dinner, regatta, and fireworks at Zakret, Count 
Bennigsen's country seat.  The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross t
he Niemen, and his vanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian fronti
er, Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his aidesdecamp at 
Bennigsen's country house.  It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such
 matters declared that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one p
lace. Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who had followed 
the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refined Polish ladies by 
her massive, so called Russian type of beauty. The Emperor noticed her and honore
d her with a dance.  Boris Drubetskoy, having left his wife in Moscow and being f
or the present en garcon as he phrased it, was also there and, though not an aide
decamp, had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses. Boris was now a rich man 
who had risen to high honors and no longer sought patronage but stood on an equal
 footing with the highest of those of his own age. He was meeting Helene in Vilna
 after not having seen her for a long time and did not recall the past, but as He
lene was enjoying the favors of a very important personage and Boris had only rec
ently married, they met as good friends of long standing.  At midnight dancing wa
s still going on. Helene, not having a suitable partner, herself offered to dance
 the mazurka with Boris. They were the third couple. Boris, coolly looking at Hel
ene's dazzling bare shoulders which emerged from a dark, goldembroidered, gauze g
own, talked to her of old acquaintances and at the same time, unaware of it himse
lf and unnoticed by others, never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperor wh
o was in the same room. The Emperor was not dancing, he stood in the doorway, sto
pping now one pair and now another with gracious words which he alone knew how to
 utter.  As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev, one of t
hose in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to him and contrary to court e
tiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish lady. Having finished sp
eaking to her, the Emperor looked inquiringly at Balashev and, evidently understa
nding that he only acted thus because there were important reasons for so doing, 
nodded slightly to the lady and turned to him. Hardly had Balashev begun to speak
 before a look of amazement appeared on the Emperor's face. He took Balashev by t
he arm and crossed the room with him, unconsciously clearing a path seven yards w
ide as the people on both sides made way for him. Boris noticed Arakcheev's excit
ed face when the sovereign went out with Balashev. Arakcheev looked at the Empero
r from under his brow and, sniffing with his red nose, stepped forward from the c
rowd as if expecting the Emperor to address him. Boris understood that Arakcheev 
envied Balashev and was displeased that evidently important news had reached the 
Emperor otherwise than through himself.  But the Emperor and Balashev passed out 
into the illuminated garden without noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword and
 glancing wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.  All the tim
e Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka, he was worried by the quest
ion of what news Balashev had brought and how he could find it out before others.
 In the figure in which he had to choose two ladies, he whispered to Helene that 
he meant to choose Countess Potocka who, he thought, had gone out onto the verand
a, and glided over the parquet to the door opening into the garden, where, seeing
 Balashev and the Emperor returning to the veranda, he stood still. They were mov
ing toward the door. Boris, fluttering as if he had not had time to withdraw, res
pectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head.  The Emperor, with the a
gitation of one who has been personally affronted, was finishing with these words
  "To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace as long as a sing
le armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to Boris that it gave the Empero
r pleasure to utter these words. He was satisfied with the form in which he had e
xpressed his thoughts, but displeased that Boris had overheard it.  "Let no one k
now of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.  Boris understood that this was meant
 for him and, closing his eyes, slightly bowed his head. The Emperor reentered th
e ballroom and remained there about another halfhour.  Boris was thus the first t
o learn the news that the French army had crossed the Niemen and, thanks to this,
 was able to show certain important personages that much that was concealed from 
others was usually known to him, and by this means he rose higher in their estima
tion.   The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen was particula
rly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and at a ball. On first 
receiving the news, under the influence of indignation and resentment the Emperor
 had found a phrase that pleased him, fully expressed his feelings, and has since
 become famous. On returning home at two o'clock that night he sent for his secre
tary, Shishkov, and told him to write an order to the troops and a rescript to Fi
eld Marshal Prince Saltykov, in which he insisted on the words being inserted tha
t he would not make peace so long as a single armed Frenchman remained on Russian
 soil.  Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon   Monsieur mon frere, 
 Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept my engageme
nts with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russian frontier, and I have 
this moment received from Petersburg a note, in which Count Lauriston informs me,
 as a reason for this aggression, that Your Majesty has considered yourself to be
 in a state of war with me from the time Prince Kuragin asked for his passports. 
The reasons on which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him 
would never have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext for aggress
ion. In fact, the ambassador, as he himself has declared, was never authorized to
 make that demand, and as soon as I was informed of it I let him know how much I 
disapproved of it and ordered him to remain at his post. If Your Majesty does not
 intend to shed the blood of our peoples for such a misunderstanding, and consent
s to withdraw your troops from Russian territory, I will regard what has passed a
s not having occurred and an understanding between us will be possible. In the co
ntrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel an attack that noth
ing on my part has provoked. It still depends on Your Majesty to preserve humanit
y from the calamity of another war. I am, etc.,  signed Alexander.      CHAPTER I
V   At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, having sent for
 Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to take it and hand it
 personally to the French Emperor. When dispatching Balashev, the Emperor repeate
d to him the words that he would not make peace so long as a single armed enemy r
emained on Russian soil and told him to transmit those words to Napoleon. Alexand
er did not insert them in his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic
 tact he felt it would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt
 at reconciliation was being made, but he definitely instructed Balashev to repea
t them personally to Napoleon.  Having set off in the small hours of the fourteen
th, accompanied by a bugler and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outpost
s at the village of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn. There he
 was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.  A French noncommissioned officer of hu
ssars, in crimson uniform and a shaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashev t
o halt. Balashev did not do so at once, but continued to advance along the road a
t a walking pace.  The noncommissioned officer frowned and, muttering words of ab
use, advanced his horse's chest against Balashev, put his hand to his saber, and 
shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking was he deaf that he did not do as h
e was told? Balashev mentioned who he was. The noncommissioned officer began talk
ing with his comrades about regimental matters without looking at the Russian gen
eral.  After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, after convers
ing with the Emperor less than three hours before, and in general being accustome
d to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashev found it very strange h
ere on Russian soil to encounter this hostile, and still more this disrespectful,
 application of brute force to himself.  The sun was only just appearing from beh
ind the clouds, the air was fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven alo
ng the road from the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one af
ter another, like bubbles rising in water.  Balashev looked around him, awaiting 
the arrival of an officer from the village. The Russian Cossacks and bugler and t
he French hussars looked silently at one another from time to time.  A French col
onel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, came riding from the villag
e on a handsome sleek gray horse, accompanied by two hussars. The officer, the so
ldiers, and their horses all looked smart and well kept.  It was that first perio
d of a campaign when troops are still in full trim, almost like that of peacetime
 maneuvers, but with a shade of martial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of 
the gaiety and spirit of enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campa
ign.  The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite and evi
dently understood Balashev's importance. He led him past his soldiers and behind 
the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented to the Emperor would most
 likely be satisfied immediately, as the Emperor's quarters were, he believed, no
t far off.  They rode through the village of Rykonty, past tethered French hussar
 horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared with curiosi
ty at a Russian uniform, and came out at the other end of the village. The colone
l said that the commander of the division was a mile and a quarter away and would
 receive Balashev and conduct him to his destination.  The sun had by now risen a
nd shone gaily on the bright verdure.  They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a t
avern, before they saw a group of horsemen coming toward them. In front of the gr
oup, on a black horse with trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tall man w
ith plumes in his hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders. He wore a red
 mantle, and stretched his long legs forward in French fashion. This man rode tow
ard Balashev at a gallop, his plumes flowing and his gems and gold lace glitterin
g in the bright June sunshine.  Balashev was only two horses' length from the equ
estrian with the bracelets, plumes, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who was gallo
ping toward him with a theatrically solemn countenance, when Julner, the French c
olonel, whispered respectfully "The King of Naples!" It was, in fact, Murat, now 
called "King of Naples." Though it was quite incomprehensible why he should be Ki
ng of Naples, he was called so, and was himself convinced that he was so, and the
refore assumed a more solemn and important air than formerly. He was so sure that
 he really was the King of Naples that when, on the eve of his departure from tha
t city, while walking through the streets with his wife, some Italians called out
 to him "Viva il re!" * he turned to his wife with a pensive smile and said "Poor
 fellows, they don't know that I am leaving them tomorrow!"       * "Long live th
e king."   But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples and pitied 
the grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he had been ord
ered to return to military serviceand especially since his last interview with Na
poleon in Danzig, when his august brotherinlaw had told him "I made you King that
 you should reign in my way, but not in yours!"he had cheerfully taken up his fam
iliar business, andlike a wellfed but not overfat horse that feels himself in har
ness and grows skittish between the shaftshe dressed up in clothes as variegated 
and expensive as possible, and gaily and contentedly galloped along the roads of 
Poland, without himself knowing why or whither.  On seeing the Russian general he
 threw back his head, with its long hair curling to his shoulders, in a majestica
lly royal manner, and looked inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respe
ctfully informed His Majesty of Balashev's mission, whose name he could not prono
unce.  "De Balmacheve!" said the King overcoming by his assurance the difficulty 
that had presented itself to the colonel. "Charmed to make your acquaintance, Gen
eral!" he added, with a gesture of kingly condescension.  As soon as the King beg
an to speak loud and fast his royal dignity instantly forsook him, and without no
ticing it he passed into his natural tone of goodnatured familiarity. He laid his
 hand on the withers of Balashev's horse and said  "Well, General, it all looks l
ike war," as if regretting a circumstance of which he was unable to judge.  "Your
 Majesty," replied Balashev, "my master, the Emperor, does not desire war and as 
Your Majesty sees..." said Balashev, using the words Your Majesty at every opport
unity, with the affectation unavoidable in frequently addressing one to whom the 
title was still a novelty.  Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he li
stened to "Monsieur de Balmacheve." But royaute oblige! * and he felt it incumben
t on him, as a king and an ally, to confer on state affairs with Alexander's envo
y. He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving a few steps away from his suite
, which waited respectfully, began to pace up and down with him, trying to speak 
significantly. He referred to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had resented the
 demand that he should withdraw his troops from Prussia, especially when that dem
and became generally known and the dignity of France was thereby offended.       
* "Royalty has its obligations."   Balashev replied that there was "nothing offen
sive in the demand, because..." but Murat interrupted him.  "Then you don't consi
der the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" he asked unexpectedly, with a kindly an
d foolish smile.  Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originat
or of the war.  "Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all my 
heart I wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and that the war b
egun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible!" said he, in the tone 
of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another despite a quarrel betw
een their masters.  And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the stat
e of his health, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent w
ith him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal dignity, Murat sole
mnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in which he had stood at his coronation, a
nd, waving his right arm, said  "I won't detain you longer, General. I wish succe
ss to your mission," and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers, a
nd his glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were respectfully awaiting
 him.  Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's words that he would very soon be 
brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the next village the sen
tinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him as the pickets of the vanguard had
 done, and an adjutant of the corps commander, who was fetched, conducted him int
o the village to Marshal Davout.      CHAPTER V   Davout was to Napoleon what Ara
kcheev was to Alexanderthough not a coward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as 
cruel, and as unable to express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.  I
n the organism of states such men are necessary, as wolves are necessary in the o
rganism of nature, and they always exist, always appear and hold their own, howev
er incongruous their presence and their proximity to the head of the government m
ay be. This inevitability alone can explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who tore out
 a grenadier's mustache with his own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him unable
 to face danger, and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier, was able to 
maintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character was chivalrous
, noble, and gentle.  Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a p
easant's hut, writinghe was auditing accounts. Better quarters could have been fo
und him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely put themselves in 
most depressing conditions to have a justification for being gloomy. For the same
 reason they are always hard at work and in a hurry. "How can I think of the brig
ht side of life when, as you see, I am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty
 shed?" the expression of his face seemed to say. The chief pleasure and necessit
y of such men, when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their
 own dreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed himself that pleasure when Balas
hev was brought in. He became still more absorbed in his task when the Russian ge
neral entered, and after glancing over his spectacles at Balashev's face, which w
as animated by the beauty of the morning and by his talk with Murat, he did not r
ise or even stir, but scowled still more and sneered malevolently.  When he notic
ed in Balashev's face the disagreeable impression this reception produced, Davout
 raised his head and coldly asked what he wanted.  Thinking he could have been re
ceived in such a manner only because Davout did not know that he was adjutant gen
eral to the Emperor Alexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened t
o inform him of his rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, after 
hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.  "Where is your dispatch?" he inquir
ed. "Give it to me. I will send it to the Emperor."  Balashev replied that he had
 been ordered to hand it personally to the Emperor.  "Your Emperor's orders are o
beyed in your army, but here," said Davout, "you must do as you're told."  And, a
s if to make the Russian general still more conscious of his dependence on brute 
force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officer on duty.  Balashev took out th
e packet containing the Emperor's letter and laid it on the table made of a door 
with its hinges still hanging on it, laid across two barrels. Davout took the pac
ket and read the inscription.  "You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with res
pect or not," protested Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor
 to be adjutant general to His Majesty...."  Davout glanced at him silently and p
lainly derived pleasure from the signs of agitation and confusion which appeared 
on Balashev's face.  "You will be treated as is fitting," said he and, putting th
e packet in his pocket, left the shed.  A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de
 Castres, came in and conducted Balashev to the quarters assigned him.  That day 
he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.  Next day Davout rod
e out early and, after asking Balashev to come to him, peremptorily requested him
 to remain there, to move on with the baggage train should orders come for it to 
move, and to talk to no one except Monsieur de Castres.  After four days of solit
ude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotence and insignificanceparticularly acu
te by contrast with the sphere of power in which he had so lately movedand after 
several marches with the marshal's baggage and the French army, which occupied th
e whole district, Balashev was brought to Vilnanow occupied by the Frenchthrough 
the very gate by which he had left it four days previously.  Next day the imperia
l gentlemaninwaiting, the Comte de Turenne, came to Balashev and informed him of 
the Emperor Napoleon's wish to honor him with an audience.  Four days before, sen
tinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had stood in front of the house to which Bal
ashev was conducted, and now two French grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms u
nfastened in front and with shaggy caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars 
and Uhlans and a brilliant suite of aidesdecamp, pages, and generals, who were wa
iting for Napoleon to come out, were standing at the porch, round his saddle hors
e and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Balashev in the very house in Vilna
 from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.      CHAPTER VI   Though
 Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxury and magnificence
 of Napoleon's court.  The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room 
where many generals, gentlemeninwaiting, and Polish magnatesseveral of whom Balas
hev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russiawere waiting. Duroc said that N
apoleon would receive the Russian general before going for his ride.  After some 
minutes, the gentlemaninwaiting who was on duty came into the great reception roo
m and, bowing politely, asked Balashev to follow him.  Balashev went into a small
 reception room, one door of which led into a study, the very one from which the 
Russian Emperor had dispatched him on his mission. He stood a minute or two, wait
ing. He heard hurried footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened ra
pidly all was silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps, 
firm and resolutethey were those of Napoleon. He had just finished dressing for h
is ride, and wore a blue uniform, opening in front over a white waistcoat so long
 that it covered his rotund stomach, white leather breeches tightly fitting the f
at thighs of his short legs, and Hessian boots. His short hair had evidently just
 been brushed, but one lock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead. His pl
ump white neck stood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform, and he sm
elled of Eau de Cologne. His full face, rather younglooking, with its prominent c
hin, wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperial welcome.  He entered bri
skly, with a jerk at every step and his head slightly thrown back. His whole shor
t corpulent figure with broad thick shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntaril
y protruding, had that imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty w
ho live in comfort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best of spirits that 
day.  He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and coming up to 
him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of his time and doe
s not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is sure he will always say the
 right thing and say it well.  "Good day, General!" said he. "I have received the
 letter you brought from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you." He g
lanced with his large eyes into Balashav's face and immediately looked past him. 
 It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at all. Evidently 
only what took place within his own mind interested him. Nothing outside himself 
had any significance for him, because everything in the world, it seemed to him, 
depended entirely on his will.  "I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued
, "but it has been forced on me. Even now" he emphasized the word "I am ready to 
receive any explanations you can give me."  And he began clearly and concisely to
 explain his reasons for dissatisfaction with the Russian government. Judging by 
the calmly moderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashev
 was firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter into negotia
tions.  When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at the Russia
n envoy, Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before "Sire! The Emperor, 
my master..." but the sight of the Emperor's eyes bent on him confused him. "You 
are flurriedcompose yourself!" Napoleon seemed to say, as with a scarcely percept
ible smile he looked at Balashev's uniform and sword.  Balashev recovered himself
 and began to speak. He said that the Emperor Alexander did not consider Kurakin'
s demand for his passports a sufficient cause for war that Kurakin had acted on h
is own initiative and without his sovereign's assent, that the Emperor Alexander 
did not desire war, and had no relations with England.  "Not yet!" interposed Nap
oleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to his feelings, he frowned and nodded sli
ghtly as a sign that Balashev might proceed.  After saying all he had been instru
cted to say, Balashev added that the Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but woul
d not enter into negotiations except on condition that... Here Balashev hesitated
 he remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in his letter, but
 had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and had told Balashev to repe
at to Napoleon. Balashev remembered these words, "So long as a single armed foe r
emains on Russian soil," but some complex feeling restrained him. He could not ut
ter them, though he wished to do so. He grew confused and said "On condition that
 the French army retires beyond the Niemen."  Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarra
ssment when uttering these last words his face twitched and the calf of his left 
leg began to quiver rhythmically. Without moving from where he stood he began spe
aking in a louder tone and more hurriedly than before. During the speech that fol
lowed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarily noticed the q
uivering of Napoleon's left leg which increased the more Napoleon raised his voic
e.  "I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he began. "Have I not f
or eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it? I have waited eighteen mon
ths for explanations. But in order to begin negotiations, what is demanded of me?
" he said, frowning and making an energetic gesture of inquiry with his small whi
te plump hand.  "The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," replied Ba
lashev.  "The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So now you want me to retire beyond th
e Niemenonly the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, looking straight at Balashev.  The l
atter bowed his head respectfully.  Instead of the demand of four months earlier 
to withdraw from Pomerania, only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded.
 Napoleon turned quickly and began to pace the room.  "You say the demand now is 
that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemen before commencing negotiations, but in ju
st the same way two months ago the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the V
istula and the Oder, and yet you are willing to negotiate."  He went in silence f
rom one corner of the room to the other and again stopped in front of Balashev. B
alashev noticed that his left leg was quivering faster than before and his face s
eemed petrified in its stern expression. This quivering of his left leg was a thi
ng Napoleon was conscious of. "The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with
 me," he remarked at a later date.  "Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistul
a and Oder may be made to a Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost scre
amed, quite to his own surprise. "If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could no
t accept such conditions. You say I have begun this war! But who first joined his
 army? The Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offer me negotiations when I have ex
pended millions, when you are in alliance with England, and when your position is
 a bad one. You offer me negotiations! But what is the aim of your alliance with 
England? What has she given you?" he continued hurriedly, evidently no longer try
ing to show the advantages of peace and discuss its possibility, but only to prov
e his own rectitude and power and Alexander's errors and duplicity.  The commence
ment of his speech had obviously been made with the intention of demonstrating th
e advantages of his position and showing that he was nevertheless willing to nego
tiate. But he had begun talking, and the more he talked the less could he control
 his words.  The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself 
and insult Alexanderjust what he had least desired at the commencement of the int
erview.  "I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"  Balashev bowed his head affir
matively.  "Peace has been concluded..." he began.  But Napoleon did not let him 
speak. He evidently wanted to do all the talking himself, and continued to talk w
ith the sort of eloquence and unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people a
re so prone.  "Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtaining M
oldavia and Wallachia I would have given your sovereign those provinces as I gave
 him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised and would have given the Emperor Alex
ander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now he won't have those splendid provinces. Yet
 he might have united them to his empire and in a single reign would have extende
d Russia from the Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the Grea
t could not have done more," said Napoleon, growing more and more excited as he p
aced up and down the room, repeating to Balashev almost the very words he had use
d to Alexander himself at Tilsit. "All that, he would have owed to my friendship.
 Oh, what a splendid reign!" he repeated several times, then paused, drew from hi
s pocket a gold snuffbox, lifted it to his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.  "Wh
at a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander's might have been!"  He looked compassi
onately at Balashev, and as soon as the latter tried to make some rejoinder hasti
ly interrupted him.  "What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtai
ned through my friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders in perplex
ity. "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with my enemies, and with whom
? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, and Wintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor expell
ed from his own country Armfeldt, a rake and an intriguer Wintzingerode, a fugiti
ve French subject Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but all th
e same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807 and who should awaken
 terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander's mind.... Granted that were they com
petent they might be made use of," continued Napoleonhardly able to keep pace in 
words with the rush of thoughts that incessantly sprang up, proving how right and
 strong he was in his perception the two were one and the same"but they are not e
ven that! They are neither fit for war nor peace! Barclay is said to be the most 
capable of them all, but I cannot say so, judging by his first movements. And wha
t are they doing, all these courtiers? Pfuel proposes, Armfeldt disputes, Bennigs
en considers, and Barclay, called on to act, does not know what to decide on, and
 time passes bringing no result. Bagration alone is a military man. He's stupid, 
but he has experience, a quick eye, and resolution.... And what role is your youn
g monarch playing in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and throw on him t
he responsibility for all that happens. A sovereign should not be with the army u
nless he is a general!" said Napoleon, evidently uttering these words as a direct
 challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander desired to be a military command
er.  "The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven't even been able to defen
d Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polish provinces. You
r army is grumbling."  "On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly abl
e to remember what had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks with
 difficulty, "the troops are burning with eagerness..."  "I know everything!" Nap
oleon interrupted him. "I know everything. I know the number of your battalions a
s exactly as I know my own. You have not two hundred thousand men, and I have thr
ee times that number. I give you my word of honor," said Napoleon, forgetting tha
t his word of honor could carry no weight"I give you my word of honor that I have
 five hundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula. The Turks will be
 of no use to you they are worth nothing and have shown it by making peace with y
ou. As for the Swedesit is their fate to be governed by mad kings. Their king was
 insane and they changed him for anotherBernadotte, who promptly went madfor no S
wede would ally himself with Russia unless he were mad."  Napoleon grinned malici
ously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose.  Balashev knew how to reply to e
ach of Napoleon's remarks, and would have done so he continually made the gesture
 of a man wishing to say something, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the a
lleged insanity of the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on he
r side Sweden is practically an island but Napoleon gave an angry exclamation to 
drown his voice. Napoleon was in that state of irritability in which a man has to
 talk, talk, and talk, merely to convince himself that he is in the right. Balash
ev began to feel uncomfortable as envoy he feared to demean his dignity and felt 
the necessity of replying but, as a man, he shrank before the transport of ground
less wrath that had evidently seized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now
 uttered by Napoleon had any significance, and that Napoleon himself would be ash
amed of them when he came to his senses. Balashev stood with downcast eyes, looki
ng at the movements of Napoleon's stout legs and trying to avoid meeting his eyes
.  "But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I have alliesthe Poles
. There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like lions. And there will be 
two hundred thousand of them."  And probably still more perturbed by the fact tha
t he had uttered this obvious falsehood, and that Balashev still stood silently b
efore him in the same attitude of submission to fate, Napoleon abruptly turned ro
und, drew close to Balashev's face, and, gesticulating rapidly and energetically 
with his white hands, almost shouted  "Know that if you stir up Prussia against m
e, I'll wipe it off the map of Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted 
by anger, and he struck one of his small hands energetically with the other. "Yes
, I will throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will reerect
 against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of Europe to allow to b
e destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to you. That is what you have gained b
y alienating me!" And he walked silently several times up and down the room, his 
fat shoulders twitching.  He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it 
out again, lifted it several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev.
 He paused, looked ironically straight into Balashev's eyes, and said in a quiet 
voice  "And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had!"  Balashev, fee
ling it incumbent on him to reply, said that from the Russian side things did not
 appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon was silent, still looking derisively at hi
m and evidently not listening to him. Balashev said that in Russia the best resul
ts were expected from the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say, "I 
know it's your duty to say that, but you don't believe it yourself. I have convin
ced you."  When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, sniffed
 at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The door opened, a g
entlemaninwaiting, bending respectfully, handed the Emperor his hat and gloves an
other brought him a pocket handkerchief. Napoleon, without giving them a glance, 
turned to Balashev  "Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," said he, taking his h
at, "that I am as devoted to him as before I know him thoroughly and very highly 
esteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer, General you shall receiv
e my letter to the Emperor."  And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in 
the reception room rushed forward and descended the staircase.      CHAPTER VII  
 After all that Napoleon had said to himthose bursts of anger and the last dryly 
spoken words "I will detain you no longer, General you shall receive my letter," 
Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon would not wish to see him, and would even a
void another meeting with himan insulted envoyespecially as he had witnessed his 
unseemly anger. But, to his surprise, Balashev received, through Duroc, an invita
tion to dine with the Emperor that day.  Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier we
re present at that dinner.  Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not 
only showed no sign of constraint or selfreproach on account of his outburst that
 morning, but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It was evident that h
e had long been convinced that it was impossible for him to make a mistake, and t
hat in his perception whatever he did was right, not because it harmonized with a
ny idea of right and wrong, but because he did it.  The Emperor was in very good 
spirits after his ride through Vilna, where crowds of people had rapturously gree
ted and followed him. From all the windows of the streets through which he rode, 
rugs, flags, and his monogram were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcoming hi
m, waved their handkerchiefs to him.  At dinner, having placed Balashev beside hi
m, Napoleon not only treated him amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of h
is own courtiers, one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoic
e at his success. In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow and questione
d Balashev about the Russian capital, not merely as an interested traveler asks a
bout a new city he intends to visit, but as if convinced that Balashev, as a Russ
ian, must be flattered by his curiosity.  "How many inhabitants are there in Mosc
ow? How many houses? Is it true that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many chu
rches are there in Moscow?" he asked.  And receiving the reply that there were mo
re than two hundred churches, he remarked  "Why such a quantity of churches?"  "T
he Russians are very devout," replied Balashev.  "But a large number of monasteri
es and churches is always a sign of the backwardness of a people," said Napoleon,
 turning to Caulaincourt for appreciation of this remark.  Balashev respectfully 
ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.  "Every country has its own charact
er," said he.  "But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that," said Napoleon
.  "I beg your Majesty's pardon," returned Balashev, "besides Russia there is Spa
in, where there are also many churches and monasteries."  This reply of Balashev'
s, which hinted at the recent defeats of the French in Spain, was much appreciate
d when he related it at Alexander's court, but it was not much appreciated at Nap
oleon's dinner, where it passed unnoticed.  The uninterested and perplexed faces 
of the marshals showed that they were puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suggeste
d. "If there is a point we don't see it, or it is not at all witty," their expres
sions seemed to say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did no
t notice it at all and naively asked Balashev through what towns the direct road 
from there to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was on the alert all through the dinne
r, replied that just as "all roads lead to Rome," so all roads lead to Moscow the
re were many roads, and "among them the road through Poltava, which Charles XII c
hose." Balashev involuntarily flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply
, but hardly had he uttered the word Poltava before Caulaincourt began speaking o
f the badness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburg reminis
cences.  After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which four d
ays previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat down, toying 
with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned Balashev to a chair beside him.  Napoleo
n was in that wellknown afterdinner mood which, more than any reasoned cause, mak
es a man contented with himself and disposed to consider everyone his friend. It 
seemed to him that he was surrounded by men who adored him and he felt convinced 
that, after his dinner, Balashev too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turne
d to him with a pleasant, though slightly ironic, smile.  "They tell me this is t
he room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strange, isn't it, General?" he said, evi
dently not doubting that this remark would be agreeable to his hearer since it we
nt to prove his, Napoleon's, superiority to Alexander.  Balashev made no reply an
d bowed his head in silence.  "Yes. Four days ago in this room, Wintzingerode and
 Stein were deliberating," continued Napoleon with the same derisive and selfconf
ident smile. "What I can't understand," he went on, "is that the Emperor Alexande
r has surrounded himself with my personal enemies. That I do not... understand. H
as he not thought that I may do the same?" and he turned inquiringly to Balashev,
 and evidently this thought turned him back on to the track of his morning's ange
r, which was still fresh in him.  "And let him know that I will do so!" said Napo
leon, rising and pushing his cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttemb
erg, Baden, and Weimar relations out of Germany.... Yes. I'll drive them out. Let
 him prepare an asylum for them in Russia!"  Balashev bowed his head with an air 
indicating that he would like to make his bow and leave, and only listened becaus
e he could not help hearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this ex
pression he treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man now ful
ly devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master's humiliation.  "And 
why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What is the good of th
at? War is my profession, but his business is to reign and not to command armies!
 Why has he taken on himself such a responsibility?"  Again Napoleon brought out 
his snuffbox, paced several times up and down the room in silence, and then, sudd
enly and unexpectedly, went up to Balashev and with a slight smile, as confidentl
y, quickly, and simply as if he were doing something not merely important but ple
asing to Balashev, he raised his hand to the fortyyearold Russian general's face 
and, taking him by the ear, pulled it gently, smiling with his lips only.  To hav
e one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the greatest honor and mark of f
avor at the French court.  "Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, w
hy don't you say anything?" said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to
 be the adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. "Are the horses read
y for the general?" he added, with a slight inclination of his head in reply to B
alashev's bow. "Let him have mine, he has a long way to go!"  The letter taken by
 Balashev was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander. Every detail of the interview 
was communicated to the Russian monarch, and the war began...      CHAPTER VIII  
 After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went to Petersburg, on 
business as he told his family, but really to meet Anatole Kuragin whom he felt i
t necessary to encounter. On reaching Petersburg he inquired for Kuragin but the 
latter had already left the city. Pierre had warned his brotherinlaw that Prince 
Andrew was on his track. Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an appointment from th
e Minister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia. While in Petersburg Prin
ce Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who was always well disposed toward h
im, and Kutuzov suggested that he should accompany him to the army in Moldavia, t
o which the old general had been appointed commander in chief. So Prince Andrew, 
having received an appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.  Princ
e Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kuragin. He thought that 
if he challenged him without some fresh cause it might compromise the young Count
ess Rostova and so he wanted to meet Kuragin personally in order to find a fresh 
pretext for a duel. But he again failed to meet Kuragin in Turkey, for soon after
 Prince Andrew arrived, the latter returned to Russia. In a new country, amid new
 conditions, Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had bro
ken faith with himwhich he felt the more acutely the more he tried to conceal its
 effectsthe surroundings in which he had been happy became trying to him, and the
 freedom and independence he had once prized so highly were still more so. Not on
ly could he no longer think the thoughts that had first come to him as he lay gaz
ing at the sky on the field of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon with Pierre
, and which had filled his solitude at Bogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Ro
me, but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizons they
 had revealed. He was now concerned only with the nearest practical matters unrel
ated to his past interests, and he seized on these the more eagerly the more thos
e past interests were closed to him. It was as if that lofty, infinite canopy of 
heaven that had once towered above him had suddenly turned into a low, solid vaul
t that weighed him down, in which all was clear, but nothing eternal or mysteriou
s.  Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service was the simp
lest and most familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov's staff, he applied himse
lf to business with zeal and perseverance and surprised Kutuzov by his willingnes
s and accuracy in work. Not having found Kuragin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not
 think it necessary to rush back to Russia after him, but all the same he knew th
at however long it might be before he met Kuragin, despite his contempt for him a
nd despite all the proofs he deduced to convince himself that it was not worth st
ooping to a conflict with himhe knew that when he did meet him he would not be ab
le to resist calling him out, any more than a ravenous man can help snatching at 
food. And the consciousness that the insult was not yet avenged, that his rancor 
was still unspent, weighed on his heart and poisoned the artificial tranquillity 
which he managed to obtain in Turkey by means of restless, plodding, and rather v
ainglorious and ambitious activity.  In the year 1812, when news of the war with 
Napoleon reached Bucharestwhere Kutuzov had been living for two months, passing h
is days and nights with a Wallachian womanPrince Andrew asked Kutuzov to transfer
 him to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary of Bolkonski's activity 
which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very readily let him go and gave him a
 mission to Barclay de Tolly.  Before joining the Western Army which was then, in
 May, encamped at Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on 
his way, being only two miles off the Smolensk highroad. During the last three ye
ars there had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt, and seen so
 much having traveled both in the east and the west, that on reaching Bald Hills 
it struck him as strange and unexpected to find the way of life there unchanged a
nd still the same in every detail. He entered through the gates with their stone 
pillars and drove up the avenue leading to the house as if he were entering an en
chanted, sleeping castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, the sam
e stillness reigned there, and inside there was the same furniture, the same wall
s, sounds, and smell, and the same timid faces, only somewhat older. Princess Mar
y was still the same timid, plain maiden getting on in years, uselessly and joyle
ssly passing the best years of her life in fear and constant suffering. Mademoise
lle Bourienne was the same coquettish, selfsatisfied girl, enjoying every moment 
of her existence and full of joyous hopes for the future. She had merely become m
ore selfconfident, Prince Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he had brought fro
m Switzerland, was wearing a coat of Russian cut and talking broken Russian to th
e servants, but was still the same narrowly intelligent, conscientious, and pedan
tic preceptor. The old prince had changed in appearance only by the loss of a too
th, which left a noticeable gap on one side of his mouth in character he was the 
same as ever, only showing still more irritability and skepticism as to what was 
happening in the world. Little Nicholas alone had changed. He had grown, become r
osier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quite unconsciously lif
ted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just as the little princess used to 
do. He alone did not obey the law of immutability in the enchanted, sleeping cast
le. But though externally all remained as of old, the inner relations of all thes
e people had changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household was di
vided into two alien and hostile camps, who changed their habits for his sake and
 only met because he was there. To the one camp belonged the old prince, Mademois
elle Bourienne, and the architect to the other Princess Mary, Dessalles, little N
icholas, and all the old nurses and maids.  During his stay at Bald Hills all the
 family dined together, but they were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he 
was a visitor for whose sake an exception was being made and that his presence ma
de them all feel awkward. Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day, 
he was taciturn, and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumb and r
etired to his apartments directly after dinner. In the evening, when Prince Andre
w went to him and, trying to rouse him, began to tell him of the young Count Kame
nsky's campaign, the old prince began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, b
laming her for her superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne, who, 
he said, was the only person really attached to him.  The old prince said that if
 he was ill it was only because of Princess Mary that she purposely worried and i
rritated him, and that by indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Princ
e Nicholas. The old prince knew very well that he tormented his daughter and that
 her life was very hard, but he also knew that he could not help tormenting her a
nd that she deserved it. "Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this, say nothing to m
e about his sister? Does he think me a scoundrel, or an old fool who, without any
 reason, keeps his own daughter at a distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to hi
mself? He doesn't understand, so I must explain it, and he must hear me out," tho
ught the old prince. And he began explaining why he could not put up with his dau
ghter's unreasonable character.  "If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without loo
king up he was censuring his father for the first time in his life, "I did not wi
sh to speak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion. If ther
e is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary, I can't blame her for
 it at all. I know how she loves and respects you. Since you ask me," continued P
rince Andrew, becoming irritableas he was always liable to do of late"I can only 
say that if there are any misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless wom
an, who is not fit to be my sister's companion."  The old man at first stared fix
edly at his son, and an unnatural smile disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth
 to which Prince Andrew could not get accustomed.  "What companion, my dear boy? 
Eh? You've already been talking it over! Eh?"  "Father, I did not want to judge,"
 said Prince Andrew, in a hard and bitter tone, "but you challenged me, and I hav
e said, and always shall say, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blamethe on
e to blameis that Frenchwoman."  "Ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!
" said the old man in a low voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some e
mbarrassment, but then he suddenly jumped up and cried "Be off, be off! Let not a
 trace of you remain here!..."   Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princ
ess Mary persuaded him to stay another day. That day he did not see his father, w
ho did not leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and Tikh
on, but asked several times whether his son had gone. Next day, before leaving, P
rince Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy, curlyheaded like his mother and gl
owing with health, sat on his knee, and Prince Andrew began telling him the story
 of Bluebeard, but fell into a reverie without finishing the story. He thought no
t of this pretty child, his son whom he held on his knee, but of himself. He soug
ht in himself either remorse for having angered his father or regret at leaving h
ome for the first time in his life on bad terms with him, and was horrified to fi
nd neither. What meant still more to him was that he sought and did not find in h
imself the former tenderness for his son which he had hoped to reawaken by caress
ing the boy and taking him on his knee.  "Well, go on!" said his son.  Prince And
rew, without replying, put him down from his knee and went out of the room.  As s
oon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, and especially on return
ing to the old conditions of life amid which he had been happy, weariness of life
 overcame him with its former intensity, and he hastened to escape from these mem
ories and to find some work as soon as possible.  "So you've decided to go, Andre
w?" asked his sister.  "Thank God that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very 
sorry you can't."  "Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you say 
that, when you are going to this terrible war, and he is so old? Mademoiselle Bou
rienne says he has been asking about you...."  As soon as she began to speak of t
hat, her lips trembled and her tears began to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and
 began pacing the room.  "Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and whatwhat tr
ashcan cause people misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary.
  She understood that when speaking of "trash" he referred not only to Mademoisel
le Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man who had ruined his own
 happiness.  "Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touching his 
elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears. "I understand yo
u" she looked down. "Don't imagine that sorrow is the work of men. Men are His to
ols." She looked a little above Prince Andrew's head with the confident, accustom
ed look with which one looks at the place where a familiar portrait hangs. "Sorro
w is sent by Him, not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not to blame. If 
you think someone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! We have no right to pun
ish. And then you will know the happiness of forgiving."  "If I were a woman I wo
uld do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue. But a man should not and cannot forgiv
e and forget," he replied, and though till that moment he had not been thinking o
f Kuragin, all his unexpended anger suddenly swelled up in his heart.  "If Mary i
s already persuading me forgive, it means that I ought long ago to have punished 
him," he thought. And giving her no further reply, he began thinking of the glad 
vindictive moment when he would meet Kuragin who he knew was now in the army.  Pr
incess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that she knew how unhappy her
 father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to him, but Prince Andre
w replied that he would probably soon be back again from the army and would certa
inly write to his father, but that the longer he stayed now the more embittered t
heir differences would become.  "Goodby, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come f
rom God, and men are never to blame," were the last words he heard from his siste
r when he took leave of her.  "Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he d
rove out of the avenue from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature
, is left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits. The old man f
eels he is guilty, but cannot change himself. My boy is growing up and rejoices i
n life, in which like everybody else he will deceive or be deceived. And I am off
 to the army. Why? I myself don't know. I want to meet that man whom I despise, s
o as to give him a chance to kill and laugh at me!"  These conditions of life had
 been the same before, but then they were all connected, while now they had all t
umbled to pieces. Only senseless things, lacking coherence, presented themselves 
one after another to Prince Andrew's mind.      CHAPTER IX   Prince Andrew reache
d the general headquarters of the army at the end of June. The first army, with w
hich was the Emperor, occupied the fortified camp at Drissa the second army was r
etreating, trying to effect a junction with the first one from which it was said 
to be cut off by large French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with the general 
course of affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any danger of invas
ion of the Russian provinces, and no one thought the war would extend farther tha
n the western, the Polish, provinces.  Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to w
hom he had been assigned, on the bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single to
wn or large village in the vicinity of the camp, the immense number of generals a
nd courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the villages
 on both sides of the river, over a radius of six miles. Barclay de Tolly was qua
rtered nearly three miles from the Emperor. He received Bolkonski stiffly and col
dly and told him in his foreign accent that he would mention him to the Emperor f
or a decision as to his employment, but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staf
f. Anatole Kuragin, whom Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army, was not t
here. He had gone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this. His min
d was occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting a gigantic war,
 and he was glad to be free for a while from the distraction caused by the though
t of Kuragin. During the first four days, while no duties were required of him, P
rince Andrew rode round the whole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own knowl
edge and by talks with experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it. But th
e question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained for him 
undecided. Already from his military experience and what he had seen in the Austr
ian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in war the most deeply considere
d plans have no significance and that all depends on the way unexpected movements
 of the enemythat cannot be foreseenare met, and on how and by whom the whole mat
ter is handled. To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing
 his position and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the control of 
the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and he deduced for himself the
 following of the state of affairs.  While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, t
he forces had been divided into three armies. First, the army under Barclay de To
lly, secondly, the army under Bagration, and thirdly, the one commanded by Tormas
ov. The Emperor was with the first army, but not as commander in chief. In the or
ders issued it was stated, not that the Emperor would take command, but only that
 he would be with the army. The Emperor, moreover, had with him not a commander i
n chief's staff but the imperial headquarters staff. In attendance on him was the
 head of the imperial staff, Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as well as g
enerals, imperial aidesdecamp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of foreig
ners, but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on the Empe
ror without any definite appointments Arakcheev, the exMinister of War Count Benn
igsen, the senior general in rank the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich 
Count Rumyantsev, the Chancellor Stein, a former Prussian minister Armfeldt, a Sw
edish general Pfuel, the chief author of the plan of campaign Paulucci, an adjuta
nt general and Sardinian emigre Wolzogenand many others. Though these men had no 
military appointment in the army, their position gave them influence, and often a
 corps commander, or even the commander in chief, did not know in what capacity h
e was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke, Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or
 was given this or that advice and did not know whether a certain order received 
in the form of advice emanated from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and w
hether it had to be executed or not. But this was only the external condition the
 essential significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people, f
rom a courtier's point of view and in an Emperor's vicinity all became courtiers,
 was clear to everyone. It was this the Emperor did not assume the title of comma
nder in chief, but disposed of all the armies the men around him were his assista
nts. Arakcheev was a faithful custodian to enforce order and acted as the soverei
gn's bodyguard. Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be
 doing the honors of the district, but was in reality a good general, useful as a
n adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke was there because 
it suited him to be. The exMinister Stein was there because his advice was useful
 and the Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally. Armfeldt virulentl
y hated Napoleon and was a general full of selfconfidence, a quality that always 
influenced Alexander. Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speec
h. The adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the Emperor, 
and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up the plan of campai
gn against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander to believe in the efficacy of t
hat plan, was directing the whole business of the war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, w
ho expressed Pfuel's thoughts in a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself who
 was a harsh, bookish theorist, selfconfident to the point of despising everyone 
else was able to do.  Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new an
d unexpected ideas every dayespecially the foreigners, who did so with a boldness
 characteristic of people employed in a country not their ownthere were many seco
ndary personages accompanying the army because their principals were there.  Amon
g the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant, and proud sphere,
 Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined subdivisions of tendencies a
nd parties  The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherentsmilitary theorist
s who believed in a science of war with immutable lawslaws of oblique movements, 
outflankings, and so forth. Pfuel and his adherents demanded a retirement into th
e depths of the country in accordance with precise laws defined by a pseudotheory
 of war, and they saw only barbarism, ignorance, or evil intention in every devia
tion from that theory. To this party belonged the foreign nobles, Wolzogen, Wintz
ingerode, and others, chiefly Germans.  The second party was directly opposed to 
the first one extreme, as always happens, was met by representatives of the other
. The members of this party were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna int
o Poland and freedom from all prearranged plans. Besides being advocates of bold 
action, this section also represented nationalism, which made them still more one
sided in the dispute. They were Russians Bagration, Ermolov who was beginning to 
come to the front, and others. At that time a famous joke of Ermolov's was being 
circulated, that as a great favor he had petitioned the Emperor to make him a Ger
man. The men of that party, remembering Suvorov, said that what one had to do was
 not to reason, or stick pins into maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him o
ut of Russia, and not let the army get discouraged.  To the third partyin which t
he Emperor had most confidencebelonged the courtiers who tried to arrange comprom
ises between the other two. The members of this party, chiefly civilians and to w
hom Arakcheev belonged, thought and said what men who have no convictions but wis
h to seem to have some generally say. They said that undoubtedly war, particularl
y against such a genius as Bonaparte they called him Bonaparte now, needs most de
eply devised plans and profound scientific knowledge and in that respect Pfuel wa
s a genius, but at the same time it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are
 often one sided, and therefore one should not trust them absolutely, but should 
also listen to what Pfuel's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare 
had to say, and then choose a middle course. They insisted on the retention of th
e camp at Drissa, according to Pfuel's plan, but on changing the movements of the
 other armies. Though, by this course, neither one aim nor the other could be att
ained, yet it seemed best to the adherents of this third party.  Of a fourth opin
ion the most conspicuous representative was the Tsarevich, who could not forget h
is disillusionment at Austerlitz, where he had ridden out at the head of the Guar
ds, in his casque and cavalry uniform as to a review, expecting to crush the Fren
ch gallantly but unexpectedly finding himself in the front line had narrowly esca
ped amid the general confusion. The men of this party had both the quality and th
e defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon, recognized his str
ength and their own weakness, and frankly said so. They said "Nothing but sorrow,
 shame, and ruin will come of all this! We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and s
hall abandon Drissa. The only reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as
 soon as possible, before we are turned out of Petersburg."  This view was very g
eneral in the upper army circles and found support also in Petersburg and from th
e chancellor, Rumyantsev, who, for other reasons of state, was in favor of peace.
  The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de Tolly, not 
so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in chief. "Be he what he ma
y" they always began like that, "he is an honest, practical man and we have nobod
y better. Give him real power, for war cannot be conducted successfully without u
nity of command, and he will show what he can do, as he did in Finland. If our ar
my is well organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering any
 defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. If Barclay is now to be superseded by 
Bennigsen all will be lost, for Bennigsen showed his incapacity already in 1807."
  The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at any rate the
re was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen "and twist about as you 
may, you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually. Let the others make mistakes 
now!" said they, arguing that our retirement to Drissa was a most shameful revers
e and an unbroken series of blunders. "The more mistakes that are made the better
. It will at any rate be understood all the sooner that things cannot go on like 
this. What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennigsen, who 
made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justicea man whose author
ity would be willingly recognized, and Bennigsen is the only such man."  The seve
nth party consisted of the sort of people who are always to be found, especially 
around young sovereigns, and of whom there were particularly many round Alexander
generals and imperial aidesdecamp passionately devoted to the Emperor, not merely
 as a monarch but as a man, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostov 
had done in 1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human capab
ilities as well. These men, though enchanted with the sovereign for refusing the 
command of the army, yet blamed him for such excessive modesty, and only desired 
and insisted that their adored sovereign should abandon his diffidence and openly
 announce that he would place himself at the head of the army, gather round him a
 commander in chief's staff, and, consulting experienced theoreticians and practi
cal men where necessary, would himself lead the troops, whose spirits would there
by be raised to the highest pitch.  The eighth and largest group, which in its en
ormous numbers was to the others as ninetynine to one, consisted of men who desir
ed neither peace nor war, neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa o
r anywhere else, neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel nor Bennigsen, bu
t only the one most essential thingas much advantage and pleasure for themselves 
as possible. In the troubled waters of conflicting and intersecting intrigues tha
t eddied about the Emperor's headquarters, it was possible to succeed in many way
s unthinkable at other times. A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative pos
t would today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the day after, me
rely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would declare that he had 
no opinion at all on the matter. Another who wished to gain some advantage would 
attract the Emperor's attention by loudly advocating the very thing the Emperor h
ad hinted at the day before, and would dispute and shout at the council, beating 
his breast and challenging those who did not agree with him to duels, thereby pro
ving that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good. A third, in t
he absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit a special grat
uity for his faithful services, well knowing that at that moment people would be 
too busy to refuse him. A fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would ofte
n come accidentally under the Emperor's eye. A fifth, to achieve his longcherishe
d aim of dining with the Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or f
alsity of some newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments
 more or less forcible and correct.  All the men of this party were fishing for r
ubles, decorations, and promotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weatherc
ock of imperial favor, and directly they noticed it turning in any direction, thi
s whole drone population of the army began blowing hard that way, so that it was 
all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid the uncertainties of th
e position, with the menace of serious danger giving a peculiarly threatening cha
racter to everything, amid this vortex of intrigue, egotism, conflict of views an
d feelings, and the diversity of race among these peoplethis eighth and largest p
arty of those preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion and ob
scurity to the common task. Whatever question arose, a swarm of these drones, wit
hout having finished their buzzing on a previous theme, flew over to the new one 
and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of those who were disputing hone
stly.  From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached the a
rmy, another, a ninth party, was being formed and was beginning to raise its voic
e. This was the party of the elders, reasonable men experienced and capable in st
ate affairs, who, without sharing any of those conflicting opinions, were able to
 take a detached view of what was going on at the staff at headquarters and to co
nsider means of escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.  Th
e men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resulted chiefly from th
e Emperor's presence in the army with his military court and from the consequent 
presence there of an indefinite, conditional, and unsteady fluctuation of relatio
ns, which is in place at court but harmful in an army that a sovereign should rei
gn but not command the army, and that the only way out of the position would be f
or the Emperor and his court to leave the army that the mere presence of the Empe
ror paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure his personal sa
fety, and that the worst commander in chief if independent would be better than t
he very best one trammeled by the presence and authority of the monarch.  Just at
 the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa, Shishkov, the Secretary 
of State and one of the chief representatives of this party, wrote a letter to th
e Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev agreed to sign. In this letter, availing h
imself of permission given him by the Emperor to discuss the general course of af
fairs, he respectfully suggestedon the plea that it was necessary for the soverei
gn to arouse a warlike spirit in the people of the capitalthat the Emperor should
 leave the army.  That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to 
them to defend their countrythe very incitement which was the chief cause of Russ
ia's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar's personal presence in Mosc
owwas suggested to the Emperor, and accepted by him, as a pretext for quitting th
e army.      CHAPTER X   This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor wh
en Barclay, one day at dinner, informed Bolkonski that the sovereign wished to se
e him personally, to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to pre
sent himself at Bennigsen's quarters at six that evening.  News was received at t
he Emperor's quarters that very day of a fresh movement by Napoleon which might e
ndanger the armynews subsequently found to be false. And that morning Colonel Mic
haud had ridden round the Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed 
out to him that this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considere
d a chefd'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon's destruction, w
as an absurdity, threatening the destruction of the Russian army.  Prince Andrew 
arrived at Bennigsen's quartersa country gentleman's house of moderate size, situ
ated on the very banks of the river. Neither Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there,
 but Chernyshev, the Emperor's aidedecamp, received Bolkonski and informed him th
at the Emperor, accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a
 second time that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp, of the su
itability of which serious doubts were beginning to be felt.  Chernyshev was sitt
ing at a window in the first room with a French novel in his hand. This room had 
probably been a music room there was still an organ in it on which some rugs were
 piled, and in one corner stood the folding bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant. Thi
s adjutant was also there and sat dozing on the rolledup bedding, evidently exhau
sted by work or by feasting. Two doors led from the room, one straight on into wh
at had been the drawing room, and another, on the right, to the study. Through th
e first door came the sound of voices conversing in German and occasionally in Fr
ench. In that drawing room were gathered, by the Emperor's wish, not a military c
ouncil the Emperor preferred indefiniteness, but certain persons whose opinions h
e wished to know in view of the impending difficulties. It was not a council of w
ar, but, as it were, a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor per
sonally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General Armfeldt, Adjut
ant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode whom Napoleon had referred to as a renegade F
rench subject, Michaud, Toll, Count Stein who was not a military man at all, and 
Pfuel himself, who, as Prince Andrew had heard, was the mainspring of the whole a
ffair. Prince Andrew had an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel 
arrived soon after himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped a
 minute to speak to Chernyshev.  At first sight, Pfuel, in his illmade uniform of
 a Russian general, which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar 
to Prince Andrew, though he saw him now for the first time. There was about him s
omething of Weyrother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other German theoristgenerals 
whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was more typical than any of them. Pr
ince Andrew had never yet seen a German theorist in whom all the characteristics 
of those others were united to such an extent.  Pfuel was short and very thin but
 broadboned, of coarse, robust build, broad in the hips, and with prominent shoul
der blades. His face was much wrinkled and his eyes deep set. His hair had eviden
tly been hastily brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in q
uaint little tufts. He entered the room, looking restlessly and angrily around, a
s if afraid of everything in that large apartment. Awkwardly holding up his sword
, he addressed Chernyshev and asked in German where the Emperor was. One could se
e that he wished to pass through the rooms as quickly as possible, finish with th
e bows and greetings, and sit down to business in front of a map, where he would 
feel at home. He nodded hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled ironically o
n hearing that the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he, Pfuel, ha
d planned in accord with his theory. He muttered something to himself abruptly an
d in a bass voice, as selfassured Germans doit might have been "stupid fellow"...
 or "the whole affair will be ruined," or "something absurd will come of it."... 
Prince Andrew did not catch what he said and would have passed on, but Chernyshev
 introduced him to Pfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey 
where the war had terminated so fortunately. Pfuel barely glancednot so much at P
rince Andrew as past himand said, with a laugh "That must have been a fine tactic
al war" and, laughing contemptuously, went on into the room from which the sound 
of voices was heard.  Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was parti
cularly disturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect 
and criticize his camp in his absence. From this short interview with Pfuel, Prin
ce Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able to form a clear concept
ion of the man. Pfuel was one of those hopelessly and immutably selfconfident men
, selfconfident to the point of martyrdom as only Germans are, because only Germa
ns are selfconfident on the basis of an abstract notionscience, that is, the supp
osed knowledge of absolute truth. A Frenchman is selfassured because he regards h
imself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistibly attractive to men and w
omen. An Englishman is selfassured, as being a citizen of the bestorganized state
 in the world, and therefore as an Englishman always knows what he should do and 
knows that all he does as an Englishman is undoubtedly correct. An Italian is sel
fassured because he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people. A R
ussian is selfassured just because he knows nothing and does not want to know any
thing, since he does not believe that anything can be known. The German's selfass
urance is worst of all, stronger and more repulsive than any other, because he im
agines that he knows the truthsciencewhich he himself has invented but which is f
or him the absolute truth.  Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a sciencethe
 theory of oblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick the Gre
at's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recent warfare seemed to
 him absurd and barbarousmonstrous collisions in which so many blunders were comm
itted by both sides that these wars could not be called wars, they did not accord
 with the theory, and therefore could not serve as material for science.  In 1806
 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan of campaign that ended in 
Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the least proof of the fallibility of his 
theory in the disasters of that war. On the contrary, the deviations made from hi
s theory were, in his opinion, the sole cause of the whole disaster, and with cha
racteristically gleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the whole affair 
would go to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love their th
eory that they lose sight of the theory's objectits practical application. His lo
ve of theory made him hate everything practical, and he would not listen to it. H
e was even pleased by failures, for failures resulting from deviations in practic
e from the theory only proved to him the accuracy of his theory.  He said a few w
ords to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the present war, with the air of a man
 who knows beforehand that all will go wrong, and who is not displeased that it s
hould be so. The unbrushed tufts of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brush
ed hair on his temples expressed this most eloquently.  He passed into the next r
oom, and the deep, querulous sounds of his voice were at once heard from there.  
    CHAPTER XI   Prince Andrew's eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room 
when Count Bennigsen entered hurriedly, and nodding to Bolkonski, but not pausing
, went into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant as he went. The Empero
r was following him, and Bennigsen had hastened on to make some preparations and 
to be ready to receive the sovereign. Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into 
the porch, where the Emperor, who looked fatigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulu
cci was talking to him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent
 to the left, was listening with a dissatisfied air. The Emperor moved forward ev
idently wishing to end the conversation, but the flushed and excited Italian, obl
ivious of decorum, followed him and continued to speak.  "And as for the man who 
advised forming this campthe Drissa camp," said Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted 
the steps and noticing Prince Andrew scanned his unfamiliar face, "as to that per
son, sire..." continued Paulucci, desperately, apparently unable to restrain hims
elf, "the man who advised the Drissa campI see no alternative but the lunatic asy
lum or the gallows!"  Without heeding the end of the Italian's remarks, and as th
ough not hearing them, the Emperor, recognizing Bolkonski, addressed him gracious
ly.  "I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting, and wait for
 me."  The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peter Mikhaylov
ich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind them. Prince Andrew, ta
king advantage of the Emperor's permission, accompanied Paulucci, whom he had kno
wn in Turkey, into the drawing room where the council was assembled.  Prince Pete
r Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as it were, of chief of the Emper
or's staff. He came out of the study into the drawing room with some maps which h
e spread on a table, and put questions on which he wished to hear the opinion of 
the gentlemen present. What had happened was that news which afterwards proved to
 be false had been received during the night of a movement by the French to outfl
ank the Drissa camp.  The first to speak was General Armfeldt who, to meet the di
fficulty that presented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position aw
ay from the Petersburg and Moscow roads. The reason for this was inexplicable unl
ess he wished to show that he, too, could have an opinion, but he urged that at t
his point the army should unite and there await the enemy. It was plain that Armf
eldt had thought out that plan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answe
r the questions putwhich, in fact, his plan did not answeras to avail himself of 
the opportunity to air it. It was one of the millions of proposals, one as good a
s another, that could be made as long as it was quite unknown what character the 
war would take. Some disputed his arguments, others defended them. Young Count To
ll objected to the Swedish general's views more warmly than anyone else, and in t
he course of the dispute drew from his side pocket a wellfilled notebook, which h
e asked permission to read to them. In these voluminous notes Toll suggested anot
her scheme, totally different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign. In ans
wer to Toll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged, could 
alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap as he called th
e Drissa camp in which we were situated.  During all these discussions Pfuel and 
his interpreter, Wolzogen his "bridge" in court relations, were silent. Pfuel onl
y snorted contemptuously and turned away, to show that he would never demean hims
elf by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing. So when Prince Volkonski,
 who was in the chair, called on him to give his opinion, he merely said  "Why as
k me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with an exposed rear, or 
why not this Italian gentleman's attackvery fine, or a retreat, also good! Why as
k me?" said he. "Why, you yourselves know everything better than I do."  But when
 Volkonski said, with a frown, that it was in the Emperor's name that he asked hi
s opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly growing animated, began to speak  "Everything
 has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody thought they knew better than I 
did, and now you come to me! How mend matters? There is nothing to mend! The prin
ciples laid down by me must be strictly adhered to," said he, drumming on the tab
le with his bony fingers. "What is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"  He w
ent up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that no eventuality could al
ter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, that everything had been foreseen, and tha
t if the enemy were really going to outflank it, the enemy would inevitably be de
stroyed.  Paulucci, who did not know German, began questioning him in French. Wol
zogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly, and began tran
slating for him, hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel, who was rapidly demonstrati
ng that not only all that had happened, but all that could happen, had been fores
een in his scheme, and that if there were now any difficulties the whole fault la
y in the fact that his plan had not been precisely executed. He kept laughing sar
castically, he demonstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, li
ke a mathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of a problem 
that has already been proved. Wolzogen took his place and continued to explain hi
s views in French, every now and then turning to Pfuel and saying, "Is it not so,
 your excellency?" But Pfuel, like a man heated in a fight who strikes those on h
is own side, shouted angrily at his own supporter, Wolzogen  "Well, of course, wh
at more is there to explain?"  Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simult
aneously in French. Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to Volkons
ki in Russian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.  Of all these men 
Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry, determined, and absurdly selfco
nfident as he was. Of all those present, evidently he alone was not seeking anyth
ing for himself, nursed no hatred against anyone, and only desired that the plan,
 formed on a theory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out. He was ri
diculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntary respect by 
his boundless devotion to an idea. Besides this, the remarks of all except Pfuel 
had one common trait that had not been noticeable at the council of war in 1805 t
here was now a panic fear of Napoleon's genius, which, though concealed, was noti
ceable in every rejoinder. Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, th
ey expected him from every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each ot
her's proposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian like everyon
e else who opposed his theory. But besides this feeling of respect, Pfuel evoked 
pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which the courtiers addressed him and the
 way Paulucci had allowed himself to speak of him to the Emperor, but above all f
rom a certain desperation in Pfuel's own expressions, it was clear that the other
s knew, and Pfuel himself felt, that his fall was at hand. And despite his selfco
nfidence and grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothly brushe
d on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind. Though he concealed the fact un
der a show of irritation and contempt, he was evidently in despair that the sole 
remaining chance of verifying his theory by a huge experiment and proving its sou
ndness to the whole world was slipping away from him.  The discussions continued 
a long time, and the longer they lasted the more heated became the disputes, culm
inating in shouts and personalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at an
y general conclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening to thi
s polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and shouts, felt nothi
ng but amazement at what they were saying. A thought that had long since and ofte
n occurred to him during his military activitiesthe idea that there is not and ca
nnot be any science of war, and that therefore there can be no such thing as a mi
litary geniusnow appeared to him an obvious truth. "What theory and science is po
ssible about a matter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and c
annot be defined, especially when the strength of the acting forces cannot be asc
ertained? No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our or the enemy's a
rmies will be in a day's time, and no one can gauge the force of this or that det
achment. Sometimeswhen there is not a coward at the front to shout, 'We are cut o
ff!' and start running, but a brave and jolly lad who shouts, 'Hurrah!'a detachme
nt of five thousand is worth thirty thousand, as at Schon Grabern, while at times
 fifty thousand run from eight thousand, as at Austerlitz. What science can there
 be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothing can be defined and
 everything depends on innumerable conditions, the significance of which is deter
mined at a particular moment which arrives no one knows when? Armfeldt says our a
rmy is cut in half, and Paulucci says we have got the French army between two fir
es Michaud says that the worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the rive
r behind it, and Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength Toll proposes o
ne plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and the advantages 
of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial. And why do they all s
peak of a 'military genius'? Is a man a genius who can order bread to be brought 
up at the right time and say who is to go to the right and who to the left? It is
 only because military men are invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychoph
ants flatter power, attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess. Th
e best generals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid or absentminded men. B
agration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that. And of Bonaparte himself! 
I remember his limited, selfsatisfied face on the field of Austerlitz. Not only d
oes a good army commander not need any special qualities, on the contrary he need
s the absence of the highest and best human attributeslove, poetry, tenderness, a
nd philosophic inquiring doubt. He should be limited, firmly convinced that what 
he is doing is very important otherwise he will not have sufficient patience, and
 only then will he be a brave leader. God forbid that he should be humane, should
 love, or pity, or think of what is just and unjust. It is understandable that a 
theory of their 'genius' was invented for them long ago because they have power! 
The success of a military action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks
 who shouts, 'We are lost!' or who shouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the ranks can on
e serve with assurance of being useful."  So thought Prince Andrew as he listened
 to the talking, and he roused himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone
 was leaving.  At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he wo
uld like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circles forever b
y not asking to remain attached to the sovereign's person, but for permission to 
serve in the army.      CHAPTER XII   Before the beginning of the campaign, Rosto
v had received a letter from his parents in which they told him briefly of Natash
a's illness and the breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew which they ex
plained by Natasha's having rejected him and again asked Nicholas to retire from 
the army and return home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did not even make an
y attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from the army, but wrote to his pa
rents that he was sorry Natasha was ill and her engagement broken off, and that h
e would do all he could to meet their wishes. To Sonya he wrote separately.  "Ado
red friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothing but honor could keep me from returning
 to the country. But now, at the commencement of the campaign, I should feel dish
onored, not only in my comrades' eyes but in my own, if I preferred my own happin
ess to my love and duty to the Fatherland. But this shall be our last separation.
 Believe me, directly the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved by you
, I will throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardent br
east."  It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign that prevented Ros
tov from returning home as he had promised and marrying Sonya. The autumn in Otra
dnoe with the hunting, and the winter with the Christmas holidays and Sonya's lov
e, had opened out to him a vista of tranquil rural joys and peace such as he had 
never known before, and which now allured him. "A splendid wife, children, a good
 pack of hounds, a dozen leashes of smart borzois, agriculture, neighbors, servic
e by election..." thought he. But now the campaign was beginning, and he had to r
emain with his regiment. And since it had to be so, Nicholas Rostov, as was natur
al to him, felt contented with the life he led in the regiment and was able to fi
nd pleasure in that life.  On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been 
joyfully welcomed by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back f
rom the Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendation fr
om his commanders. During his absence he had been promoted captain, and when the 
regiment was put on war footing with an increase in numbers, he was again allotte
d his old squadron.  The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on do
uble pay, new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody was i
nfected with the merrily excited mood that goes with the commencement of a war, a
nd Rostov, conscious of his advantageous position in the regiment, devoted himsel
f entirely to the pleasures and interests of military service, though he knew tha
t sooner or later he would have to relinquish them.  The troops retired from Viln
a for various complicated reasons of state, political and strategic. Each step of
 the retreat was accompanied by a complicated interplay of interests, arguments, 
and passions at headquarters. For the Pavlograd hussars, however, the whole of th
is retreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplies was a 
very simple and agreeable business.  It was only at headquarters that there was d
epression, uneasiness, and intriguing in the body of the army they did not ask th
emselves where they were going or why. If they regretted having to retreat, it wa
s only because they had to leave billets they had grown accustomed to, or some pr
etty young Polish lady. If the thought that things looked bad chanced to enter an
yone's head, he tried to be as cheerful as befits a good soldier and not to think
 of the general trend of affairs, but only of the task nearest to hand. First the
y camped gaily before Vilna, making acquaintance with the Polish landowners, prep
aring for reviews and being reviewed by the Emperor and other high commanders. Th
en came an order to retreat to Sventsyani and destroy any provisions they could n
ot carry away with them. Sventsyani was remembered by the hussars only as the dru
nken camp, a name the whole army gave to their encampment there, and because many
 complaints were made against the troops, who, taking advantage of the order to c
ollect provisions, took also horses, carriages, and carpets from the Polish propr
ietors. Rostov remembered Sventsyani, because on the first day of their arrival a
t that small town he changed his sergeant major and was unable to manage all the 
drunken men of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrels of
 old beer. From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to Drissa, and thence
 again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russia proper.  On the thir
teenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a serious action for the first time.  
On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavy storm of rai
n and hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was remarkable for its storms.  The tw
o Pavlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye, which was already in ea
r but had been completely trodden down by cattle and horses. The rain was descend
ing in torrents, and Rostov, with a young officer named Ilyin, his protege, was s
itting in a hastily constructed shelter. An officer of their regiment, with long 
mustaches extending onto his cheeks, who after riding to the staff had been overt
aken by the rain, entered Rostov's shelter.  "I have come from the staff, Count. 
Have you heard of Raevski's exploit?"  And the officer gave them details of the S
altanov battle, which he had heard at the staff.  Rostov, smoking his pipe and tu
rning his head about as the water trickled down his neck, listened inattentively,
 with an occasional glance at Ilyin, who was pressing close to him. This officer,
 a lad of sixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the same relat
ion to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denisov seven years before. Ilyin tried
 to imitate Rostov in everything and adored him as a girl might have done.  Zdrzh
inski, the officer with the long mustache, spoke grandiloquently of the Saltanov 
dam being "a Russian Thermopylae," and of how a deed worthy of antiquity had been
 performed by General Raevski. He recounted how Raevski had led his two sons onto
 the dam under terrific fire and had charged with them beside him. Rostov heard t
he story and not only said nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski's enthusiasm but, on t
he contrary, looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearing, though with no int
ention of contradicting it. Since the campaigns of Austerlitz and of 1807 Rostov 
knew by experience that men always lie when describing military exploits, as he h
imself had done when recounting them besides that, he had experience enough to kn
ow that nothing happens in war at all as we can imagine or relate it. And so he d
id not like Zdrzhinski's tale, nor did he like Zdrzhinski himself who, with his m
ustaches extending over his cheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as was 
his habit, and crowded Rostov in the narrow shanty. Rostov looked at him in silen
ce. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusion and crowding on th
e dam that was being attacked that if Raevski did lead his sons there, it could h
ave had no effect except perhaps on some dozen men nearest to him," thought he, "
the rest could not have seen how or with whom Raevski came onto the dam. And even
 those who did see it would not have been much stimulated by it, for what had the
y to do with Raevski's tender paternal feelings when their own skins were in dang
er? And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether they took t
he Saltanov dam or not, as we are told was the case at Thermopylae. So why should
 he have made such a sacrifice? And why expose his own children in the battle? I 
would not have taken my brother Petya there, or even Ilyin, who's a stranger to m
e but a nice lad, but would have tried to put them somewhere under cover," Nichol
as continued to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express his t
houghts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience. He knew that this ta
le redounded to the glory of our arms and so one had to pretend not to doubt it. 
And he acted accordingly.  "I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticing th
at Rostov did not relish Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockings and shirt... an
d the water is running on my seat! I'll go and look for shelter. The rain seems l
ess heavy."  Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.  Five minutes later Ilyin, 
splashing through the mud, came running back to the shanty.  "Hurrah! Rostov, com
e quick! I've found it! About two hundred yards away there's a tavern where ours 
have already gathered. We can at least get dry there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's the
re."  Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young Ger
man woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whether from lack of means or bec
ause he did not like to part from his young wife in the early days of their marri
age, took her about with him wherever the hussar regiment went and his jealousy h
ad become a standing joke among the hussar officers.  Rostov threw his cloak over
 his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka to follow with the things, andnow slipping i
n the mud, now splashing right through itset off with Ilyin in the lessening rain
 and the darkness that was occasionally rent by distant lightning.  "Rostov, wher
e are you?"  "Here. What lightning!" they called to one another.      CHAPTER XII
I   In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there were alrea
dy some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump little blonde German, in a dres
sing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on a broad bench in the front corner. Her h
usband, the doctor, lay asleep behind her. Rostov and Ilyin, on entering the room
, were welcomed with merry shouts and laughter.  "Dear me, how jolly we are!" sai
d Rostov laughing.  "And why do you stand there gaping?"  "What swells they are! 
Why, the water streams from them! Don't make our drawing room so wet."  "Don't me
ss Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.  Rostov and Ilyin hastened to 
find a corner where they could change into dry clothes without offending Mary Hen
drikhovna's modesty. They were going into a tiny recess behind a partition to cha
nge, but found it completely filled by three officers who sat playing cards by th
e light of a solitary candle on an empty box, and these officers would on no acco
unt yield their position. Mary Hendrikhovna obliged them with the loan of a petti
coat to be used as a curtain, and behind that screen Rostov and Ilyin, helped by 
Lavrushka who had brought their kits, changed their wet things for dry ones.  A f
ire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board was found, fixed on two s
addles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar was produced and a cellaret
 and half a bottle of rum, and having asked Mary Hendrikhovna to preside, they al
l crowded round her. One offered her a clean handkerchief to wipe her charming ha
nds, another spread a jacket under her little feet to keep them from the damp, an
other hung his coat over the window to keep out the draft, and yet another waved 
the flies off her husband's face, lest he should wake up.  "Leave him alone," sai
d Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly and happily. "He is sleeping well as it is, 
after a sleepless night."  "Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one
 must look after the doctor. Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comes
 to cutting off a leg or an arm for me."  There were only three tumblers, the wat
er was so muddy that one could not make out whether the tea was strong or weak, a
nd the samovar held only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasant
er to take turns in order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from Mary Hendrik
hovna's plump little hands with their short and not overclean nails. All the offi
cers appeared to be, and really were, in love with her that evening. Even those p
laying cards behind the partition soon left their game and came over to the samov
ar, yielding to the general mood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seeing herse
lf surrounded by such brilliant and polite young men, beamed with satisfaction, t
ry as she might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time her husb
and moved in his sleep behind her.  There was only one spoon, sugar was more plen
tiful than anything else, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided tha
t Mary Hendrikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostov received h
is tumbler, and adding some rum to it asked Mary Hendrikhovna to stir it.  "But y
ou take it without sugar?" she said, smiling all the time, as if everything she s
aid and everything the others said was very amusing and had a double meaning.  "I
t is not the sugar I want, but only that your little hand should stir my tea."  M
ary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someone meanwhile
 had pounced on.  "Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," s
aid Rostov.  "Too hot!" she replied, blushing with pleasure.  Ilyin put a few dro
ps of rum into the bucket of water and brought it to Mary Hendrikhovna, asking he
r to stir it with her finger.  "This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finger i
n it and I'll drink it all up."  When they had emptied the samovar, Rostov took a
 pack of cards and proposed that they should play "Kings" with Mary Hendrikhovna.
 They drew lots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suggestion it w
as agreed that whoever became "King" should have the right to kiss Mary Hendrikho
vna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill and reheat the samovar for t
he doctor when the latter awoke.  "Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King
'?" asked Ilyin.  "As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!"  They had hardly
 begun to play before the doctor's disheveled head suddenly appeared from behind 
Mary Hendrikhovna. He had been awake for some time, listening to what was being s
aid, and evidently found nothing entertaining or amusing in what was going on. Hi
s face was sad and depressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself
 and asked to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way. As soon as he had
 left the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and Mary Hendrikhovna bl
ushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby became still more attractive to
 them. Returning from the yard, the doctor told his wife who had ceased to smile 
so happily, and looked at him in alarm, awaiting her sentence that the rain had c
eased and they must go to sleep in their covered cart, or everything in it would 
be stolen.  "But I'll send an orderly.... Two of them!" said Rostov. "What an ide
a, doctor!"  "I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin.  "No, gentlemen, you ha
ve had your sleep, but I have not slept for two nights," replied the doctor, and 
he sat down morosely beside his wife, waiting for the game to end.  Seeing his gl
oomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers grew still merrier, and some of
 them could not refrain from laughter, for which they hurriedly sought plausible 
pretexts. When he had gone, taking his wife with him, and had settled down with h
er in their covered cart, the officers lay down in the tavern, covering themselve
s with their wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a long time now they exchange
d remarks, recalling the doctor's uneasiness and his wife's delight, now they ran
 out into the porch and reported what was taking place in the covered trap. Sever
al times Rostov, covering his head, tried to go to sleep, but some remark would a
rouse him and conversation would be resumed, to the accompaniment of unreasoning,
 merry, childlike laughter.      CHAPTER XIV   It was nearly three o'clock but no
 one was yet asleep, when the quartermaster appeared with an order to move on to 
the little town of Ostrovna. Still laughing and talking, the officers began hurri
edly getting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar. But Rostov w
ent off to his squadron without waiting for tea. Day was breaking, the rain had c
eased, and the clouds were dispersing. It felt damp and cold, especially in cloth
es that were still moist. As they left the tavern in the twilight of the dawn, Ro
stov and Ilyin both glanced under the wet and glistening leather hood of the doct
or's cart, from under the apron of which his feet were sticking out, and in the m
iddle of which his wife's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathing audible. 
 "She really is a dear little thing," said Rostov to Ilyin, who was following him
.  "A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy of sixteen.  Hal
f an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. The command was heard to "
mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted. Rostov riding in front ga
ve the order "Forward!" and the hussars, with clanking sabers and subdued talk, t
heir horses' hoofs splashing in the mud, defiled in fours and moved along the bro
ad road planted with birch trees on each side, following the infantry and a batte
ry that had gone on in front.  Tattered, bluepurple clouds, reddening in the east
, were scudding before the wind. It was growing lighter and lighter. That curly g
rass which always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible, still wet wi
th the night's rain the drooping branches of the birches, also wet, swayed in the
 wind and flung down bright drops of water to one side. The soldiers' faces were 
more and more clearly visible. Rostov, always closely followed by Ilyin, rode alo
ng the side of the road between two rows of birch trees.  When campaigning, Rosto
v allowed himself the indulgence of riding not a regimental but a Cossack horse. 
A judge of horses and a sportsman, he had lately procured himself a large, fine, 
mettlesome, Donets horse, duncolored, with light mane and tail, and when he rode 
it no one could outgallop him. To ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he t
hought of the horse, of the morning, of the doctor's wife, but not once of the im
pending danger.  Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid now he 
had not the least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he had grown used
 to being under fire one cannot grow used to danger, but because he had learned h
ow to manage his thoughts when in danger. He had grown accustomed when going into
 action to think about anything but what would seem most likely to interest himth
e impending danger. During the first period of his service, hard as he tried and 
much as he reproached himself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this, bu
t with time it had come of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees
, occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand, sometimes touchin
g his horse's side with his foot, or, without turning round, handing a pipe he ha
d finished to an hussar riding behind him, with as calm and careless an air as th
ough he were merely out for a ride. He glanced with pity at the excited face of I
lyin, who talked much and in great agitation. He knew from experience the torment
ing expectation of terror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only t
ime could help him.  As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath 
the clouds, the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morn
ing after the storm drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, and all wa
s still. The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappeared behind a long narr
ow cloud that hung above it. A few minutes later it reappeared brighter still fro
m behind the top of the cloud, tearing its edge. Everything grew bright and glitt
ered. And with that light, and as if in reply to it, came the sound of guns ahead
 of them.  Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance of t
hat firing, Count OstermannTolstoy's adjutant came galloping from Vitebsk with or
ders to advance at a trot along the road.  The squadron overtook and passed the i
nfantry and the batterywhich had also quickened their pacerode down a hill, and p
assing through an empty and deserted village again ascended. The horses began to 
lather and the men to flush.  "Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the regiment
al commander was heard ahead. "Forward by the left. Walk, march!" came the order 
from in front.  And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left fla
nk of our position, halted behind our Uhlans who were in the front line. To the r
ight stood our infantry in a dense column they were the reserve. Higher up the hi
ll, on the very horizon, our guns were visible through the wonderfully clear air,
 brightly illuminated by slanting morning sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dal
e, could be seen the enemy's columns and guns. Our advanced line, already in acti
on, could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale.  At these
 sounds, long unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at the strains of the merriest m
usic. Traptatatap! cracked the shots, now together, now several quickly one after
 another. Again all was silent and then again it sounded as if someone were walki
ng on detonators and exploding them.  The hussars remained in the same place for 
about an hour. A cannonade began. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind t
he squadron, halted, spoke to the commander of the regiment, and rode up the hill
 to the guns.  After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the Uhlans.  "Form
 column! Prepare to charge!"  The infantry in front of them parted into platoons 
to allow the cavalry to pass. The Uhlans started, the streamers on their spears f
luttering, and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below to
 the left.  As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered up
 the hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by the Uhlans, 
bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, but fell spent without taking
 effect.  The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even more pleasu
rable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous sounds of firing. Drawi
ng himself up, he viewed the field of battle opening out before him from the hill
, and with his whole soul followed the movement of the Uhlans. They swooped down 
close to the French dragoons, something confused happened there amid the smoke, a
nd five minutes later our Uhlans were galloping back, not to the place they had o
ccupied but more to the left, and among the orangecolored Uhlans on chestnut hors
es and behind them, in a large group, blue French dragoons on gray horses could b
e seen.      CHAPTER XV   Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the f
irst to catch sight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans. Nearer and
 nearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoons pursuing the
m. He could already see how these men, who looked so small at the foot of the hil
l, jostled and overtook one another, waving their arms and their sabers in the ai
r.  Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He felt instincti
vely that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, the latter could not 
withstand them, but if a charge was to be made it must be done now, at that very 
moment, or it would be too late. He looked around. A captain, standing beside him
, was gazing like himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.  "Andrew Sev
astyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crush them...."  "A fine thing too!"
 replied the captain, "and really..."  Rostov, without waiting to hear him out, t
ouched his horse, galloped to the front of his squadron, and before he had time t
o finish giving the word of command, the whole squadron, sharing his feeling, was
 following him. Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it. He acted as he 
did when hunting, without reflecting or considering. He saw the dragoons near and
 that they were galloping in disorder he knew they could not withstand an attackk
new there was only that moment and that if he let it slip it would not return. Th
e bullets were whining and whistling so stimulatingly around him and his horse wa
s so eager to go that he could not restrain himself. He touched his horse, gave t
he word of command, and immediately, hearing behind him the tramp of the horses o
f his deployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons. Hardly h
ad they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace instinctively changed to
 a gallop, which grew faster and faster as they drew nearer to our Uhlans and the
 French dragoons who galloped after them. The dragoons were now close at hand. On
 seeing the hussars, the foremost began to turn, while those behind began to halt
. With the same feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf, Ros
tov gave rein to his Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the drago
ons' disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on foot flung himself t
o the ground to avoid being knocked over, and a riderless horse fell in among the
 hussars. Nearly all the French dragoons were galloping back. Rostov, picking out
 one on a gray horse, dashed after him. On the way he came upon a bush, his galla
nt horse cleared it, and almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he sa
w that he would immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. That Frenchman, b
y his uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouching on his gray horse and 
urging it on with his saber. In another moment Rostov's horse dashed its breast a
gainst the hindquarters of the officer's horse, almost knocking it over, and at t
he same instant Rostov, without knowing why, raised his saber and struck the Fren
chman with it.  The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. Th
e officer fell, not so much from the blowwhich had but slightly cut his arm above
 the elbowas from the shock to his horse and from fright. Rostov reined in his ho
rse, and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he had vanquished. The French dragoo
n officer was hopping with one foot on the ground, the other being caught in the 
stirrup. His eyes, screwed up with fear as if he every moment expected another bl
ow, gazed up at Rostov with shrinking terror. His pale and mudstained facefair an
d young, with a dimple in the chin and lightblue eyeswas not an enemy's face at a
ll suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face. Before Rostov had
 decided what to do with him, the officer cried, "I surrender!" He hurriedly but 
vainly tried to get his foot out of the stirrup and did not remove his frightened
 blue eyes from Rostov's face. Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot a
nd helped him into the saddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the drago
ons one was wounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up his h
orse another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him a third was 
being helped by an hussar to mount his horse. In front, the French infantry were 
firing as they ran. The hussars galloped hastily back with their prisoners. Rosto
v galloped back with the rest, aware of an unpleasant feeling of depression in hi
s heart. Something vague and confused, which he could not at all account for, had
 come over him with the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him.  C
ount OstermannTolstoy met the returning hussars, sent for Rostov, thanked him, an
d said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor and would recommend him fo
r a St. George's Cross. When sent for by Count Ostermann, Rostov, remembering tha
t he had charged without orders, felt sure his commander was sending for him to p
unish him for breach of discipline. Ostermann's flattering words and promise of a
 reward should therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly, but he still fe
lt that same vaguely disagreeable feeling of moral nausea. "But what on earth is 
worrying me?" he asked himself as he rode back from the general. "Ilyin? No, he's
 safe. Have I disgraced myself in any way? No, that's not it." Something else, re
sembling remorse, tormented him. "Yes, oh yes, that French officer with the dimpl
e. And I remember how my arm paused when I raised it."  Rostov saw the prisoners 
being led away and galloped after them to have a look at his Frenchman with the d
imple on his chin. He was sitting in his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse a
nd looked anxiously about him The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a
 wound. He glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting.
 Rostov still had the same indefinite feeling, as of shame.  All that day and the
 next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov, without being dull or angry, 
was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied. He drank reluctantly, tried to remain al
one, and kept turning something over in his mind.  Rostov was always thinking abo
ut that brilliant exploit of his, which to his amazement had gained him the St. G
eorge's Cross and even given him a reputation for bravery, and there was somethin
g he could not at all understand. "So others are even more afraid than I am!" he 
thought. "So that's all there is in what is called heroism! And did I do it for m
y country's sake? And how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes? And how
 frightened he was! He thought that I should kill him. Why should I kill him? My 
hand trembled. And they have given me a St. George's Cross.... I can't make it ou
t at all."  But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could re
ach no clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in the service
, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the affair at Ostrovna he was brou
ght into notice, received command of an hussar battalion, and when a brave office
r was needed he was chosen.      CHAPTER XVI   On receiving news of Natasha's ill
ness, the countess, though not quite well yet and still weak, went to Moscow with
 Petya and the rest of the household, and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitr
ievna's house to their own and settled down in town.  Natasha's illness was so se
rious that, fortunately for her and for her parents, the consideration of all tha
t had caused the illness, her conduct and the breaking off of her engagement, rec
eded into the background. She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consi
der in how far she was to blame for what had happened. She could not eat or sleep
, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made them feel, was in dange
r. They could not think of anything but how to help her. Doctors came to see her 
singly and in consultation, talked much in French, German, and Latin, blamed one 
another, and prescribed a great variety of medicines for all the diseases known t
o them, but the simple idea never occurred to any of them that they could not kno
w the disease Natasha was suffering from, as no disease suffered by a live man ca
n be known, for every living person has his own peculiarities and always has his 
own peculiar, personal, novel, complicated disease, unknown to medicinenot a dise
ase of the lungs, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and so on mentioned in medical book
s, but a disease consisting of one of the innumerable combinations of the maladie
s of those organs. This simple thought could not occur to the doctors as it canno
t occur to a wizard that he is unable to work his charms because the business of 
their lives was to cure, and they received money for it and had spent the best ye
ars of their lives on that business. But, above all, that thought was kept out of
 their minds by the fact that they saw they were really useful, as in fact they w
ere to the whole Rostov family. Their usefulness did not depend on making the pat
ient swallow substances for the most part harmful the harm was scarcely perceptib
le, as they were given in small doses, but they were useful, necessary, and indis
pensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of those who lov
ed herand that is why there are, and always will be, pseudohealers, wise women, h
omeopaths, and allopaths. They satisfied that eternal human need for hope of reli
ef, for sympathy, and that something should be done, which is felt by those who a
re suffering. They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child
, when it wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. A child knocks itself 
and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching spot rubbe
d or kissed, and it feels better when this is done. The child cannot believe that
 the strongest and wisest of its people have no remedy for its pain, and the hope
 of relief and the expression of its mother's sympathy while she rubs the bump co
mforts it. The doctors were of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her 
bump, assuring her that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemi
st's in the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box for a ruble and
 seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled water at intervals of pr
ecisely two hours, neither more nor less.  What would Sonya and the count and cou
ntess have done, how would they have looked, if nothing had been done, if there h
ad not been those pills to give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlet
s, and all the other details of life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of 
which supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle? How would the 
count have borne his dearly loved daughter's illness had he not known that it was
 costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would not grudge thousands more to be
nefit her, or had he not known that if her illness continued he would not grudge 
yet other thousands and would take her abroad for consultations there, and had he
 not been able to explain the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understo
od the symptoms, but Frise had, and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better? What w
ould the countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid 
for not strictly obeying the doctor's orders?  "You'll never get well like that,"
 she would say, forgetting her grief in her vexation, "if you won't obey the doct
or and take your medicine at the right time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know
, or it may turn to pneumonia," she would go on, deriving much comfort from the u
tterance of that foreign word, incomprehensible to others as well as to herself. 
 What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had not undre
ssed during the first three nights, in order to be ready to carry out all the doc
tor's injunctions with precision, and that she still kept awake at night so as no
t to miss the proper time when the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box 
had to be administered? Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so ma
ny sacrifices were being made for her sake, and to know that she had to take medi
cine at certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would cure her and th
at it was all nonsense. And it was even pleasant to be able to show, by disregard
ing the orders, that she did not believe in medical treatment and did not value h
er life.  The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and re
gardless of her griefstricken face joked with her. But when he had gone into anot
her room, to which the countess hurriedly followed him, he assumed a grave air an
d thoughtfully shaking his head said that though there was danger, he had hopes o
f the effect of this last medicine and one must wait and see, that the malady was
 chiefly mental, but... And the countess, trying to conceal the action from herse
lf and from him, slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the pat
ient with a more tranquil mind.  The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she 
ate little, slept little, coughed, and was always lowspirited. The doctors said t
hat she could not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her in the stifl
ing atmosphere of the town, and the Rostovs did not move to the country that summ
er of 1812.  In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders o
ut of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of such th
ings made a large collection, and in spite of being deprived of the country life 
to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. Natasha's grief began to be overlai
d by the impressions of daily life, it ceased to press so painfully on her heart,
 it gradually faded into the past, and she began to recover physically.      CHAP
TER XVII   Natasha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all external
 forms of pleasureballs, promenades, concerts, and theatersbut she never laughed 
without a sound of tears in her laughter. She could not sing. As soon as she bega
n to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, tears choked her tears of remorse, tears
 at the recollection of those pure times which could never return, tears of vexat
ion that she should so uselessly have ruined her young life which might have been
 so happy. Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy, in 
face of her sorrow. Without any need of selfrestraint, no wish to coquet ever ent
ered her head. She said and felt at that time that no man was more to her than Na
stasya Ivanovna, the buffoon. Something stood sentinel within her and forbade her
 every joy. Besides, she had lost all the old interests of her carefree girlish l
ife that had been so full of hope. The previous autumn, the hunting, "Uncle," and
 the Christmas holidays spent with Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled of
tenest and most painfully. What would she not have given to bring back even a sin
gle day of that time! But it was gone forever. Her presentiment at the time had n
ot deceived herthat that state of freedom and readiness for any enjoyment would n
ot return again. Yet it was necessary to live on.  It comforted her to reflect th
at she was not better as she had formerly imagined, but worse, much worse, than a
nybody else in the world. But this was not enough. She knew that, and asked herse
lf, "What next?" But there was nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet lif
e was passing. Natasha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance to anyo
ne, but wanted nothing for herself. She kept away from everyone in the house and 
felt at ease only with her brother Petya. She liked to be with him better than wi
th the others, and when alone with him she sometimes laughed. She hardly ever lef
t the house and of those who came to see them was glad to see only one person, Pi
erre. It would have been impossible to treat her with more delicacy, greater care
, and at the same time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov. Natasha unconsciou
sly felt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society. But she was no
t even grateful to him for it nothing good on Pierre's part seemed to her to be a
n effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind to everyone that there was no m
erit in his kindness. Sometimes Natasha noticed embarrassment and awkwardness on 
his part in her presence, especially when he wanted to do something to please her
, or feared that something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her
. She noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness, which s
he imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her. After those involu
ntary wordsthat if he were free he would have asked on his knees for her hand and
 her loveuttered at a moment when she was so strongly agitated, Pierre never spok
e to Natasha of his feelings and it seemed plain to her that those words, which h
ad then so comforted her, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoke
n to comfort a crying child. It was not because Pierre was a married man, but bec
ause Natasha felt very strongly with him that moral barrier the absence of which 
she had experienced with Kuragin that it never entered her head that the relation
s between him and herself could lead to love on her part, still less on his, or e
ven to the kind of tender, selfconscious, romantic friendship between a man and a
 woman of which she had known several instances.  Before the end of the fast of S
t. Peter, Agrafena Ivanovna Belova, a country neighbor of the Rostovs, came to Mo
scow to pay her devotions at the shrines of the Moscow saints. She suggested that
 Natasha should fast and prepare for Holy Communion, and Natasha gladly welcomed 
the idea. Despite the doctor's orders that she should not go out early in the mor
ning, Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the sacrament, not as they ge
nerally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attending three services in their
 own house, but as Agrafena Ivanovna did, by going to church every day for a week
 and not once missing Vespers, Matins, or Mass.  The countess was pleased with Na
tasha's zeal after the poor results of the medical treatment, in the depths of he
r heart she hoped that prayer might help her daughter more than medicines and, th
ough not without fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to Natasha's 
wish and entrusted her to Belova. Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natasha 
at three in the morning, but generally found her already awake. She was afraid of
 being late for Matins. Hastily washing, and meekly putting on her shabbiest dres
s and an old mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh air, went out into the des
erted streets lit by the clear light of dawn. By Agrafena Ivanovna's advice Natas
ha prepared herself not in their own parish, but at a church where, according to 
the devout Agrafena Ivanovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life.
 There were never many people in the church Natasha always stood beside Belova in
 the customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into the screen be
fore the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, of humility before so
mething great and incomprehensible, seized her when at that unusual morning hour,
 gazing at the dark face of the Virgin illuminated by the candles burning before 
it and by the morning light falling from the window, she listened to the words of
 the service which she tried to follow with understanding. When she understood th
em her personal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of its own. 
When she did not understand, it was sweeter still to think that the wish to under
stand everything is pride, that it is impossible to understand all, that it is on
ly necessary to believe and to commit oneself to God, whom she felt guiding her s
oul at those moments. She crossed herself, bowed low, and when she did not unders
tand, in horror at her own vileness, simply asked God to forgive her everything, 
everything, to have mercy upon her. The prayers to which she surrendered herself 
most of all were those of repentance. On her way home at an early hour when she m
et no one but bricklayers going to work or men sweeping the street, and everybody
 within the houses was still asleep, Natasha experienced a feeling new to her, a 
sense of the possibility of correcting her faults, the possibility of a new, clea
n life, and of happiness.  During the whole week she spent in this way, that feel
ing grew every day. And the happiness of taking communion, or "communing" as Agra
fena Ivanovna, joyously playing with the word, called it, seemed to Natasha so gr
eat that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.  But the happy 
day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed in white muslin, she return
ed home after communion, for the first time for many months she felt calm and not
 oppressed by the thought of the life that lay before her.  The doctor who came t
o see her that day ordered her to continue the powders he had prescribed a fortni
ght previously.  "She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said
 he, evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please be particular 
about it.  "Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the gold 
coin in his palm. "She will soon be singing and frolicking about. The last medici
ne has done her a very great deal of good. She has freshened up very much."  The 
countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down at her nails and sp
at a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room.      CHAPTER XVIII   At
 the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the war began to s
pread in Moscow people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor to the people, and of hi
s coming himself from the army to Moscow. And as up to the eleventh of July no ma
nifesto or appeal had been received, exaggerated reports became current about the
m and about the position of Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leaving the 
army because it was in danger, it was said that Smolensk had surrendered, that Na
poleon had an army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia.  On the ele
venth of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was received but was not yet in 
print, and Pierre, who was at the Rostovs', promised to come to dinner next day, 
Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifesto and appeal, which he would obtain from 
Count Rostopchin.  That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' priv
ate chapel as usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, when the Rostovs
 got out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts of hawkers, 
the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leaves of the trees on t
he boulevard, the sounds of the band and the white trousers of a battalion marchi
ng to parade, the rattling of wheels on the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot 
sunshine were all full of that summer languor, that content and discontent with t
he present, which is most strongly felt on a bright, hot day in town. All the Mos
cow notabilities, all the Rostovs' acquaintances, were at the Razumovskis' chapel
, for, as if expecting something to happen, many wealthy families who usually lef
t town for their country estates had not gone away that summer. As Natasha, at he
r mother's side, passed through the crowd behind a liveried footman who cleared t
he way for them, she heard a young man speaking about her in too loud a whisper. 
 "That's Rostova, the one who..."  "She's much thinner, but all the same she's pr
etty!"  She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski. But 
she was always imagining that. It always seemed to her that everyone who looked a
t her was thinking only of what had happened to her. With a sinking heart, wretch
ed as she always was now when she found herself in a crowd, Natasha in her lilac 
silk dress trimmed with black lace walkedas women can walkwith the more repose an
d stateliness the greater the pain and shame in her soul. She knew for certain th
at she was pretty, but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to. On the
 contrary it tormented her more than anything else of late, and particularly so o
n this bright, hot summer day in town. "It's Sunday againanother week past," she 
thought, recalling that she had been here the Sunday before, "and always the same
 life that is no life, and the same surroundings in which it used to be so easy t
o live. I'm pretty, I'm young, and I know that now I am good. I used to be bad, b
ut now I know I am good," she thought, "but yet my best years are slipping by and
 are no good to anyone." She stood by her mother's side and exchanged nods with a
cquaintances near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies' dresses, condemned 
the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not crossing herself properly but
 in a cramped manner, and again she thought with vexation that she was herself be
ing judged and was judging others, and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she
 felt horrified at her own vileness, horrified that the former purity of her soul
 was again lost to her.  A comely, freshlooking old man was conducting the servic
e with that mild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on the s
ouls of the worshipers. The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed, the curtai
n was slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voice pronounced some wo
rds. Tears, the cause of which she herself did not understand, made Natasha's bre
ast heave, and a joyous but oppressive feeling agitated her.  "Teach me what I sh
ould do, how to live my life, how I may grow good forever, forever!" she pleaded.
  The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and, holding 
his thumb extended, drew his long hair from under his dalmatic and, making the si
gn of the cross on his breast, began in a loud and solemn voice to recite the wor
ds of the prayer...  "In peace let us pray unto the Lord."  "As one community, wi
thout distinction of class, without enmity, united by brotherly lovelet us pray!"
 thought Natasha.  "For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of ou
r souls."  "For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us," pray
ed Natasha.  When they prayed for the warriors, she thought of her brother and De
nisov. When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, she remembered Prince 
Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive her all the wrongs she had done 
him. When they prayed for those who love us, she prayed for the members of her ow
n family, her father and mother and Sonya, realizing for the first time how wrong
ly she had acted toward them, and feeling all the strength of her love for them. 
When they prayed for those who hate us, she tried to think of her enemies and peo
ple who hated her, in order to pray for them. She included among her enemies the 
creditors and all who had business dealings with her father, and always at the th
ought of enemies and those who hated her she remembered Anatole who had done her 
so much harmand though he did not hate her she gladly prayed for him as for an en
emy. Only at prayer did she feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andre
w and Anatole, as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe
 and devotion to God. When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod, she
 bowed very low and made the sign of the cross, saying to herself that even if sh
e did not understand, still she could not doubt, and at any rate loved the govern
ing Synod and prayed for it.  When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed 
the stole over his breast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives 
to Christ the Lord!"  "Commit ourselves to God," Natasha inwardly repeated. "Lord
 God, I submit myself to Thy will!" she thought. "I want nothing, wish for nothin
g teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take me!" prayed Natasha, 
with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossing herself but letting her slender
 arms hang down as if expecting some invisible power at any moment to take her an
d deliver her from herself, from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins. 
 The countess looked round several times at her daughter's softened face and shin
ing eyes and prayed God to help her.  Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service,
 and not in the usual order Natasha knew so well, the deacon brought out a small 
stool, the one he knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday, and placed it before t
he doors of the sanctuary screen. The priest came out with his purple velvet bire
tta on his head, adjusted his hair, and knelt down with an effort. Everybody foll
owed his example and they looked at one another in surprise. Then came the prayer
 just received from the Synoda prayer for the deliverance of Russia from hostile 
invasion.  "Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest in that vo
ice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clergy read and wh
ich acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart.  "Lord God of might, God of our salv
ation! Look this day in mercy and blessing on Thy humble people, and graciously h
ear us, spare us, and have mercy upon us! This foe confounding Thy land, desiring
 to lay waste the whole world, rises against us these lawless men are gathered to
gether to overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thy beloved Russi
a to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and to desecrate our holy shr
ines. How long, O Lord, how long shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they wi
eld unlawful power?  "Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee strengthen with Thy 
might our most gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich be mindfu
l of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to his righteousness, and
 let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless his counsels, his undertakings, and
 his work strengthen his kingdom by Thine almighty hand, and give him victory ove
r his enemy, even as Thou gavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midia
n, and David over Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands of 
those who have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loins with strength f
or the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us confound and put 
to shame those who have devised evil against us, may they be before the faces of 
Thy faithful warriors as dust before the wind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound 
them and put them to flight may they be ensnared when they know it not, and may t
he plots they have laid in secret be turned against them let them fall before Thy
 servants' feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save both gr
eat and small Thou art God, and man cannot prevail against Thee!  "God of our fat
hers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and lovingkindness which are from of old turn 
not Thy face from us, but be gracious to our unworthiness, and in Thy great goodn
ess and Thy many mercies regard not our transgressions and iniquities! Create in 
us a clean heart and renew a right spirit within us, strengthen us all in Thy fai
th, fortify our hope, inspire us with true love one for another, arm us with unit
y of spirit in the righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest to us and to our
 fathers, and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted against the destiny of
 those Thou hast sanctified.  "O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we 
put our trust, let us not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a t
oken of Thy blessing, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it an
d be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou art the Lord
 and we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord, and grant us Thy
 salvation make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoice in Thy mercy smite down our
 enemies and destroy them swiftly beneath the feet of Thy faithful servants! For 
Thou art the defense, the succor, and the victory of them that put their trust in
 Thee, and to Thee be all glory, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, now and forever,
 world without end. Amen."  In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer 
affected her strongly. She listened to every word about the victory of Moses over
 Amalek, of Gideon over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and about the destruct
ion of "Thy Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with the tenderness and emotion wit
h which her heart was overflowing, but without fully understanding what she was a
sking of God in that prayer. She shared with all her heart in the prayer for the 
spirit of righteousness, for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope, an
d its animation by love. But she could not pray that her enemies might be trample
d under foot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more of t
hem that she might pray for them. But neither could she doubt the righteousness o
f the prayer that was being read on bended knees. She felt in her heart a devout 
and tremulous awe at the thought of the punishment that overtakes men for their s
ins, and especially of her own sins, and she prayed to God to forgive them all, a
nd her too, and to give them all, and her too, peace and happiness. And it seemed
 to her that God heard her prayer.      CHAPTER XIX   From the day when Pierre, a
fter leaving the Rostovs' with Natasha's grateful look fresh in his mind, had gaz
ed at the comet that seemed to be fixed in the sky and felt that something new wa
s appearing on his own horizonfrom that day the problem of the vanity and useless
ness of all earthly things, that had incessantly tormented him, no longer present
ed itself. That terrible question "Why?" "Wherefore?" which had come to him amid 
every occupation, was now replaced, not by another question or by a reply to the 
former question, but by her image. When he listened to, or himself took part in, 
trivial conversations, when he read or heard of human baseness or folly, he was n
ot horrified as formerly, and did not ask himself why men struggled so about thes
e things when all is so transient and incomprehensiblebut he remembered her as he
 had last seen her, and all his doubts vanishednot because she had answered the q
uestions that had haunted him, but because his conception of her transferred him 
instantly to another, a brighter, realm of spiritual activity in which no one cou
ld be justified or guiltya realm of beauty and love which it was worth living for
. Whatever worldly baseness presented itself to him, he said to himself  "Well, s
upposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and the country and the Tsar co
nfer honors upon him, what does that matter? She smiled at me yesterday and asked
 me to come again, and I love her, and no one will ever know it." And his soul fe
lt calm and peaceful.  Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the 
same idle and dissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs'
 there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and the habits and acquaintances
 he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along irresistibly. But lat
terly, when more and more disquieting reports came from the seat of war and Natas
ha's health began to improve and she no longer aroused in him the former feeling 
of careful pity, an everincreasing restlessness, which he could not explain, took
 possession of him. He felt that the condition he was in could not continue long,
 that a catastrophe was coming which would change his whole life, and he impatien
tly sought everywhere for signs of that approaching catastrophe. One of his broth
er Masons had revealed to Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon, draw
n from the Revelation of St. John.  In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, i
t is said   Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of t
he beast for it is the number of a man and his number is Six hundred threescore a
nd six.  And in the fifth verse of the same chapter   And there was given unto hi
m a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies and power was given unto him to c
ontinue forty and two months.   The French alphabet, written out with the same nu
merical values as the Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and th
e others tens, will have the following significance        a   b   c   d   e   f 
  g   h   i   k       1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10        l    m    n  
  o    p    q    r    s       20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90              
t    u    v    w    x    y             100  110  120  130  140  150              
           z                        160   Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon i
n numbers, it appears that the sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefor
e the beast foretold in the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to 
the words quarantedeux, * which was the term allowed to the beast that "spoke gre
at things and blasphemies," the same number 666 was obtained from which it follow
ed that the limit fixed for Napoleon's power had come in the year 1812 when the F
rench emperor was fortytwo. This prophecy pleased Pierre very much and he often a
sked himself what would put an end to the power of the beast, that is, of Napoleo
n, and tried by the same system of using letters as numbers and adding them up, t
o find an answer to the question that engrossed him. He wrote the words L'Empereu
r Alexandre, La nation russe and added up their numbers, but the sums were either
 more or less than 666. Once when making such calculations he wrote down his own 
name in French, Comte Pierre Besouhoff, but the sum of the numbers did not come r
ight. Then he changed the spelling, substituting a z for the s and adding de and 
the article le, still without obtaining the desired result. Then it occurred to h
im if the answer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality woul
d also be given in the answer. So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding up the num
bers got 671. This was only five too much, and five was represented by e, the ver
y letter elided from the article le before the word Empereur. By omitting the e, 
though incorrectly, Pierre got the answer he sought. L'russe Besuhof made 666. Th
is discovery excited him. How, or by what means, he was connected with the great 
event foretold in the Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt that conne
ction for a moment. His love for Natasha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, the
 comet, 666, L'Empereur Napoleon, and L'russe Besuhofall this had to mature and c
ulminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty sphere of Moscow habits in wh
ich he felt himself held captive and lead him to a great achievement and great ha
ppiness.       * Fortytwo.   On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was
 read, Pierre had promised the Rostovs to bring them, from Count Rostopchin whom 
he knew well, both the appeal to the people and the news from the army. In the mo
rning, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he met there a courier fresh from the
 army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced at Moscow balls.  "Do, please
, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said the courier. "I have a sackfu
l of letters to parents."  Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to hi
s father. Pierre took that letter, and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor's app
eal to Moscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his own mos
t recent bulletin. Glancing through the army orders, Pierre found in one of them,
 in the lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name of Nicholas Rostov, awar
ded a St. George's Cross of the Fourth Class for courage shown in the Ostrovna af
fair, and in the same order the name of Prince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed to the
 command of a regiment of Chasseurs. Though he did not want to remind the Rostovs
 of Bolkonski, Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of the
ir son's having received a decoration, so he sent that printed army order and Nic
holas' letter to the Rostovs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin, and the other ord
ers to take with him when he went to dinner.  His conversation with Count Rostopc
hin and the latter's tone of anxious hurry, the meeting with the courier who talk
ed casually of how badly things were going in the army, the rumors of the discove
ry of spies in Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promi
sed to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn, and the talk of the Emperor
's being expected to arrive next dayall aroused with fresh force that feeling of 
agitation and expectation in Pierre which he had been conscious of ever since the
 appearance of the comet, and especially since the beginning of the war.  He had 
long been thinking of entering the army and would have done so had he not been hi
ndered, first, by his membership of the Society of Freemasons to which he was bou
nd by oath and which preached perpetual peace and the abolition of war, and secon
dly, by the fact that when he saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uni
form and were talking patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step. But t
he chief reason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in the v
ague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast, 666 that h
is part in the great affair of setting a limit to the power of the beast that spo
ke great and blasphemous things had been predestined from eternity, and that ther
efore he ought not to undertake anything, but wait for what was bound to come to 
pass.      CHAPTER XX   A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that 
day, as usual on Sundays.  Pierre came early so as to find them alone.  He had gr
own so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had he not been so tall, 
so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried his bulk with evident ease.  He w
ent up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachman did not even ask
 whether he was to wait. He knew that when his master was at the Rostovs' he stay
ed till midnight. The Rostovs' footman rushed eagerly forward to help him off wit
h his cloak and take his hat and stick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both
 hat and stick in the anteroom.  The first person he saw in the house was Natasha
. Even before he saw her, while taking off his cloak, he heard her. She was pract
icing solfa exercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sung since her 
illness, and so the sound of her voice surprised and delighted him. He opened the
 door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn at church, walking abou
t the room singing. She had her back to him when he opened the door, but when, tu
rning quickly, she saw his broad, surprised face, she blushed and came rapidly up
 to him.  "I want to try to sing again," she said, adding as if by way of excuse,
 "it is, at least, something to do."  "That's capital!"  "How glad I am you've co
me! I am so happy today," she said, with the old animation Pierre had not seen in
 her for along time. "You know Nicholas has received a St. George's Cross? I am s
o proud of him."  "Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interrup
t you," he added, and was about to go to the drawing room.  Natasha stopped him. 
 "Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said blushing, and fixing her eyes inqui
ringly on him.  "No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me
?"  "I don't know myself," Natasha answered quickly, "but I should not like to do
 anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely. You don't know how imp
ortant you are to me, how much you've done for me...." She spoke rapidly and did 
not notice how Pierre flushed at her words. "I saw in that same army order that h
e, Bolkonski" she whispered the name hastily, "is in Russia, and in the army agai
n. What do you think?"she was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength m
ight fail her"Will he ever forgive me? Will he not always have a bitter feeling t
oward me? What do you think? What do you think?"  "I think..." Pierre replied, "t
hat he has nothing to forgive.... If I were in his place..."  By association of i
deas, Pierre was at once carried back to the day when, trying to comfort her, he 
had said that if he were not himself but the best man in the world and free, he w
ould ask on his knees for her hand and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and 
love took possession of him and the same words rose to his lips. But she did not 
give him time to say them.  "Yes, you... you..." she said, uttering the word you 
rapturously"that's a different thing. I know no one kinder, more generous, or bet
ter than you nobody could be! Had you not been there then, and now too, I don't k
now what would have become of me, because..."  Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, s
he turned away, lifted her music before her eyes, began singing again, and again 
began walking up and down the room.  Just then Petya came running in from the dra
wing room.  Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips and r
esembled Natasha. He was preparing to enter the university, but he and his friend
 Obolenski had lately, in secret, agreed to join the hussars.  Petya had come rus
hing out to talk to his namesake about this affair. He had asked Pierre to find o
ut whether he would be accepted in the hussars.  Pierre walked up and down the dr
awing room, not listening to what Petya was saying.  Petya pulled him by the arm 
to attract his attention.  "Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven'
s sake! You are my only hope," said Petya.  "Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussa
rs? I'll mention it, I'll bring it all up today."  "Well, mon cher, have you got 
the manifesto?" asked the old count. "The countess has been to Mass at the Razumo
vskis' and heard the new prayer. She says it's very fine."  "Yes, I've got it," s
aid Pierre. "The Emperor is to be here tomorrow... there's to be an Extraordinary
 Meeting of the nobility, and they are talking of a levy of ten men per thousand.
 Oh yes, let me congratulate you!"  "Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news fro
m the army?"  "We are again retreating. They say we're already near Smolensk," re
plied Pierre.  "O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. "Where is the manifesto?"  
"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"  Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the pape
rs, but could not find them. Still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of th
e countess who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently expecting 
Natasha, who had left off singing but had not yet come into the drawing room.  "O
n my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.  "There he is, always l
osing everything!" remarked the countess.  Natasha entered with a softened and ag
itated expression of face and sat down looking silently at Pierre. As soon as she
 entered, Pierre's features, which had been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, and whil
e still searching for the papers he glanced at her several times.  "No, really! I
'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'll certainly..."  "But you'll be l
ate for dinner."  "Oh! And my coachman has gone."  But Sonya, who had gone to loo
k for the papers in the anteroom, had found them in Pierre's hat, where he had ca
refully tucked them under the lining. Pierre was about to begin reading.  "No, af
ter dinner," said the old count, evidently expecting much enjoyment from that rea
ding.  At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the new chevalier
 of St. George, Shinshin told them the town news, of the illness of the old Georg
ian princess, of Metivier's disappearance from Moscow, and of how some German fel
low had been brought to Rostopchin and accused of being a French "spyer" so Count
 Rostopchin had told the story, and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the peo
ple that he was "not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin."  "People are b
eing arrested..." said the count. "I've told the countess she should not speak Fr
ench so much. It's not the time for it now."  "And have you heard?" Shinshin aske
d. "Prince Golitsyn has engaged a master to teach him Russian. It is becoming dan
gerous to speak French in the streets."  "And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych
? If they call up the militia, you too will have to mount a horse," remarked the 
old count, addressing Pierre.  Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through
 dinner, seeming not to grasp what was said. He looked at the count.  "Oh yes, th
e war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make? And yet everything is s
o strange, so strange! I can't make it out. I don't know, I am very far from havi
ng military tastes, but in these times no one can answer for himself."  After din
ner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair and with a serious fac
e asked Sonya, who was considered an excellent reader, to read the appeal.   "To 
Moscow, our ancient Capital!  "The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with i
mmense forces. He comes to despoil our beloved country."   Sonya read painstaking
ly in her highpitched voice. The count listened with closed eyes, heaving abrupt 
sighs at certain passages.  Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now a
t her father and now at Pierre.  Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to loo
k round. The countess shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn e
xpression in the manifesto. In all these words she saw only that the danger threa
tening her son would not soon be over. Shinshin, with a sarcastic smile on his li
ps, was evidently preparing to make fun of anything that gave him the opportunity
 Sonya's reading, any remark of the count's, or even the manifesto itself should 
no better pretext present itself.  After reading about the dangers that threatene
d Russia, the hopes the Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustriou
s nobility, Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that w
as being paid to her, read the last words   "We ourselves will not delay to appea
r among our people in that Capital and in other parts of our realm for consultati
on, and for the direction of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy's p
ath and those freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May the ruin h
e hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may Europe delivered from bo
ndage glorify the name of Russia!"   "Yes, that's it!" cried the count, opening h
is moist eyes and sniffing repeatedly, as if a strong vinaigrette had been held t
o his nose and he added, "Let the Emperor but say the word and we'll sacrifice ev
erything and begrudge nothing."  Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he wa
s ready to make on the count's patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and r
an to her father.  "What a darling our Papa is!" she cried, kissing him, and she 
again looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to her wit
h her better spirits.  "There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin.  "Not a 
patriot at all, but simply..." Natasha replied in an injured tone. "Everything se
ems funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke...."  "A joke indeed!" put in the 
count. "Let him but say the word and we'll all go.... We're not Germans!"  "But d
id you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.  "Never mind what it's 
for...."  At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was paying any attention, came up
 to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voice that was n
ow deep and now shrill  "Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it's a
s you please, but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army, because I
 can't... that's all...."  The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped 
her hands, and turned angrily to her husband.  "That comes of your talking!" said
 she.  But the count had already recovered from his excitement.  "Come, come!" sa
id he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You must study."  "It's not nonsense
, Papa. Fedya Obolenski is younger than I, and he's going too. Besides, all the s
ame I can't study now when..." Petya stopped short, flushed till he perspired, bu
t still got out the words, "when our Fatherland is in danger."  "That'll do, that
'll dononsense...."  "But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything." 
 "Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at his wife, who h
ad turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.  "And I tell youPeter Kirilych
 here will also tell you..."  "Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk has hardl
y dried on your lips and you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you,"
 and the count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to reread
 them in his study before having a nap.  "Well, Peter Kirilych, let's go and have
 a smoke," he said.  Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly bril
liant eyes, continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, had reduce
d him to this condition.  "No, I think I'll go home."  "Home? Why, you meant to s
pend the evening with us.... You don't often come nowadays as it is, and this gir
l of mine," said the count goodnaturedly, pointing to Natasha, "only brightens up
 when you're here."  "Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business..
." said Pierre hurriedly.  "Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out 
of the room.  "Why are you going? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and she look
ed challengingly into Pierre's eyes.  "Because I love you!" was what he wanted to
 say, but he did not say it, and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered hi
s eyes.  "Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No, simply
 I have business...."  "Why? No, tell me!" Natasha began resolutely and suddenly 
stopped.  They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He tried
 to smile but could not his smile expressed suffering, and he silently kissed her
 hand and went out.  Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs' any more. 
     CHAPTER XXI   After the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his 
room and there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea, silen
t, morose, and with tearstained face, everybody pretended not to notice anything.
  Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostovs' domestic se
rfs begged permission to go to have a look at him. That morning Petya was a long 
time dressing and arranging his hair and collar to look like a grownup man. He fr
owned before his looking glass, gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, and finally
, without saying a word to anyone, took his cap and left the house by the back do
or, trying to avoid notice. Petya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was
 and to explain frankly to some gentlemaninwaiting he imagined the Emperor to be 
always surrounded by gentlemeninwaiting that he, Count Rostov, in spite of his yo
uth wished to serve his country that youth could be no hindrance to loyalty, and 
that he was ready to... While dressing, Petya had prepared many fine things he me
ant to say to the gentlemaninwaiting.  It was on the very fact of being so young 
that Petya counted for success in reaching the Emperorhe even thought how surpris
ed everyone would be at his youthfulnessand yet in the arrangement of his collar 
and hair and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grownup man. But
 the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the everincreasin
g crowds moving toward the Kremlin, the less he remembered to walk with the sedat
eness and deliberation of a man. As he approached the Kremlin he even began to av
oid being crushed and resolutely stuck out his elbows in a menacing way. But with
in the Trinity Gateway he was so pressed to the wall by people who probably were 
unaware of the patriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all h
is determination he had to give in, and stop while carriages passed in, rumbling 
beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, a footman, two tradesmen
, and a discharged soldier. After standing some time in the gateway, Petya tried 
to move forward in front of the others without waiting for all the carriages to p
ass, and he began resolutely working his way with his elbows, but the woman just 
in front of him, who was the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily 
shouted at him  "What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're al
l standing still? Then why push?"  "Anybody can shove," said the footman, and als
o began working his elbows to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy
 corner of the gateway.  Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulle
d up the damp collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man's. 
 He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he were now to 
approach the gentlemeninwaiting in that plight he would not be admitted to the Em
peror. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up or move to another place, beca
use of the crowd. One of the generals who drove past was an acquaintance of the R
ostovs', and Petya thought of asking his help, but came to the conclusion that th
at would not be a manly thing to do. When the carriages had all passed in, the cr
owd, carrying Petya with it, streamed forward into the Kremlin Square which was a
lready full of people. There were people not only in the square, but everywhereon
 the slopes and on the roofs. As soon as Petya found himself in the square he cle
arly heard the sound of bells and the joyous voices of the crowd that filled the 
whole Kremlin.  For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were
 bared, and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was being pressed so 
that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" 
Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could see nothing except the pe
ople about him.  All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusi
asm. A tradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran down her 
cheeks.  "Father! Angel! Dear one!" she kept repeating, wiping away her tears wit
h her fingers.  "Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.  For a moment the crowd stood s
till, but then it made another rush forward.  Quite beside himself, Petya, clinch
ing his teeth and rolling his eyes ferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way 
and shouting "hurrah!" as if he were prepared that instant to kill himself and ev
eryone else, but on both sides of him other people with similarly ferocious faces
 pushed forward and everybody shouted "hurrah!"  "So this is what the Emperor is!
" thought Petya. "No, I can't petition him myselfthat would be too bold." But in 
spite of this he continued to struggle desperately forward, and from between the 
backs of those in front he caught glimpses of an open space with a strip of red c
loth spread out on it but just then the crowd swayed backthe police in front were
 pushing back those who had pressed too close to the procession the Emperor was p
assing from the palace to the Cathedral of the Assumptionand Petya unexpectedly r
eceived such a blow on his side and ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly e
verything grew dim before his eyes and he lost consciousness. When he came to him
self, a man of clerical appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the back of his he
ad and wearing a shabby blue cassockprobably a church clerk and chanterwas holdin
g him under the arm with one hand while warding off the pressure of the crowd wit
h the other.  "You've crushed the young gentleman!" said the clerk. "What are you
 up to? Gently!... They've crushed him, crushed him!"  The Emperor entered the Ca
thedral of the Assumption. The crowd spread out again more evenly, and the clerk 
led Petyapale and breathlessto the Tsarcannon. Several people were sorry for Pety
a, and suddenly a crowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood 
nearest him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raised platfo
rm of the cannon, and reproached those others whoever they might be who had crush
ed him.  "One might easily get killed that way! What do they mean by it? Killing 
people! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"various voices were heard saying.  P
etya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain had passed, a
nd at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtained a place by the ca
nnon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who would be returning that way. Pety
a no longer thought of presenting his petition. If he could only see the Emperor 
he would be happy!  While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assu
mptionit was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor's arriva
l and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the Turksthe crowd outside
 spread out and hawkers appeared, selling kvas, gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets
 of which Petya was particularly fond, and ordinary conversation could again be h
eard. A tradesman's wife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling how much the
 shawl had cost another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear. The cler
k who had rescued Petya was talking to a functionary about the priests who were o
fficiating that day with the bishop. The clerk several times used the word "plena
ry" of the service, a word Petya did not understand. Two young citizens were joki
ng with some serf girls who were cracking nuts. All these conversations, especial
ly the joking with the girls, were such as might have had a particular charm for 
Petya at his age, but they did not interest him now. He sat on his elevationthe p
edestal of the cannonstill agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and b
y his love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced when he was b
eing crushed, together with that of rapture, still further intensified his sense 
of the importance of the occasion.  Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was 
heard from the embankment, to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks, and 
the crowd rushed impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing. Petya too
 would have run there, but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under his 
protection stopped him. The firing was still proceeding when officers, generals, 
and gentlemeninwaiting came running out of the cathedral, and after them others i
n a more leisurely manner caps were again raised, and those who had run to look a
t the cannon ran back again. At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from
 the cathedral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the crowd again.  "Which is he? W
hich?" asked Petya in a tearful voice, of those around him, but no one answered h
im, everybody was too excited and Petya, fixing on one of those four men, whom he
 could not clearly see for the tears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated al
l his enthusiasm on himthough it happened not to be the Emperorfrantically shoute
d "Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow, come what might, he would join the army. 
 The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and began to disper
se. It was already late, and Petya had not eaten anything and was drenched with p
erspiration, yet he did not go home but stood with that diminishing, but still co
nsiderable, crowd before the palace while the Emperor dinedlooking in at the pala
ce windows, expecting he knew not what, and envying alike the notables he saw arr
iving at the entrance to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served a
t table, glimpses of whom could be seen through the windows.  While the Emperor w
as dining, Valuev, looking out of the window, said  "The people are still hoping 
to see Your Majesty again."  The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munchin
g a biscuit, rose and went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among the
m, rushed toward the balcony.  "Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the cr
owd, and Petya with it, and again the women and men of weaker mold, Petya among t
hem, wept with joy.  A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in hi
s hand broke off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A coachman
 in a jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatched it up. Several peopl
e in the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing this the Emperor had a plateful of 
biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from the balcony. Petya's eyes 
grew bloodshot, and still more excited by the danger of being crushed, he rushed 
at the biscuits. He did not know why, but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar'
s hand and he felt that he must not give way. He sprang forward and upset an old 
woman who was catching at a biscuit the old woman did not consider herself defeat
ed though she was lying on the groundshe grabbed at some biscuits but her hand di
d not reach them. Petya pushed her hand away with his knee, seized a biscuit, and
 as if fearing to be too late, again shouted "Hurrah!" with a voice already hoars
e.  The Emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowd began to di
sperse.  "There! I said if only we waitedand so it was!" was being joyfully said 
by various people.  Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing 
that all the enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight home from the
 Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was fifteen and was also enteri
ng the regiment. On returning home Petya announced resolutely and firmly that if 
he was not allowed to enter the service he would run away. And next day, Count Il
ya Rostovthough he had not yet quite yieldedwent to inquire how he could arrange 
for Petya to serve where there would be least danger.      CHAPTER XXII   Two day
s later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriages were standing o
utside the Sloboda Palace.  The great halls were full. In the first were the nobi
lity and gentry in their uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in fullskirted
 coats of blue cloth and wearing medals. In the noblemen's hall there was an ince
ssant movement and buzz of voices. The chief magnates sat on highbacked chairs at
 a large table under the portrait of the Emperor, but most of the gentry were str
olling about the room.  All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club o
r in their own houses, were in uniformsome in that of Catherine's day, others in 
that of Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms of Alexander's time or the
 ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the general characteristic of being in uni
form imparted something strange and fantastic to these diverse and familiar perso
nalities, both old and young. The old men, dimeyed, toothless, bald, sallow, and 
bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled, were especially striking. For the most part they 
sat quietly in their places and were silent, or, if they walked about and talked,
 attached themselves to someone younger. On all these faces, as on the faces of t
he crowd Petya had seen in the Square, there was a striking contradiction the gen
eral expectation of a solemn event, and at the same time the everyday interests i
n a boston card party, Peter the cook, Zinaida Dmitrievna's health, and so on.  P
ierre was there too, buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman's uniform that
 had become too tight for him. He was agitated this extraordinary gathering not o
nly of nobles but also of the merchantclassles etats generaux StatesGeneralevoked
 in him a whole series of ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeply grav
en in his soul thoughts of the Contrat social and the French Revolution. The word
s that had struck him in the Emperor's appealthat the sovereign was coming to the
 capital for consultation with his peoplestrengthened this idea. And imagining th
at in this direction something important which he had long awaited was drawing ne
ar, he strolled about watching and listening to conversations, but nowhere findin
g any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him.  The Emperor's manifesto was r
ead, evoking enthusiasm, and then all moved about discussing it. Besides the ordi
nary topics of conversation, Pierre heard questions of where the marshals of the 
nobility were to stand when the Emperor entered, when a ball should be given in t
he Emperor's honor, whether they should group themselves by districts or by whole
 provinces... and so on but as soon as the war was touched on, or what the nobili
ty had been convened for, the talk became undecided and indefinite. Then all pref
erred listening to speaking.  A middleaged man, handsome and virile, in the unifo
rm of a retired naval officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a small crow
d was pressing round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round the 
speaker and listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in a military uniform of Catherine's tim
e, was sauntering with a pleasant smile among the crowd, with all of whom he was 
acquainted. He too approached that group and listened with a kindly smile and nod
s of approval, as he always did, to what the speaker was saying. The retired nava
l man was speaking very boldly, as was evident from the expression on the faces o
f the listeners and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and
 quietest of men walked away disapprovingly or expressed disagreement with him. P
ierre pushed his way into the middle of the group, listened, and convinced himsel
f that the man was indeed a liberal, but of views quite different from his own. T
he naval officer spoke in a particularly sonorous, musical, and aristocratic bari
tone voice, pleasantly swallowing his r's and generally slurring his consonants t
he voice of a man calling out to his servant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It was in
dicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority.  "What if the Smolensk peo
ple have offahd to waise militia for the Empewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our p
atte'n? If the noble awistocwacy of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can sho
w its loyalty to our sov'weign the Empewah in other ways. Have we fo'gotten the w
aising of the militia in the yeah 'seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests'
 sons and thieves and wobbahs...."  Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded a
pproval.  "And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuine
d our farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' men will wetu'n neithah
 soldiers no' peasants, and we'll get only depwavity fwom them. The nobility don'
t gwudge theah livesevewy one of us will go and bwing in more wecwuits, and the s
ov'weign" that was the way he referred to the Emperor "need only say the word and
 we'll all die fo' him!" added the orator with animation.  Count Rostov's mouth w
atered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, but Pierre wanted to speak himself. He
 pushed forward, feeling stirred, but not yet sure what stirred him or what he wo
uld say. Scarcely had he opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without
 a tooth in his head, with a shrewd though angry expression, standing near the fi
rst speaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to managing debates and to mai
ntaining an argument, he began in low but distinct tones  "I imagine, sir," said 
he, mumbling with his toothless mouth, "that we have been summoned here not to di
scuss whether it's best for the empire at the present moment to adopt conscriptio
n or to call out the militia. We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with w
hich our sovereign the Emperor has honored us. But to judge what is bestconscript
ion or the militiawe can leave to the supreme authority...."  Pierre suddenly saw
 an outlet for his excitement. He hardened his heart against the senator who was 
introducing this set and narrow attitude into the deliberations of the nobility. 
Pierre stepped forward and interrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he w
ould say, but he began to speak eagerly, occasionally lapsing into French or expr
essing himself in bookish Russian.  "Excuse me, your excellency," he began. He wa
s well acquainted with the senator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to 
address him formally. "Though I don't agree with the gentleman..." he hesitated h
e wished to say, "Mon tres honorable preopinant""My very honorable opponent" "wit
h the gentleman... whom I have not the honor of knowing, I suppose that the nobil
ity have been summoned not merely to express their sympathy and enthusiasm but al
so to consider the means by which we can assist our Fatherland! I imagine," he we
nt on, warming to his subject, "that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied t
o find in us merely owners of serfs whom we are willing to devote to his service,
 and chair a canon * we are ready to make of ourselvesand not to obtain from us a
ny cococounsel."       * "Food for cannon."   Many persons withdrew from the circ
le, noticing the senator's sarcastic smile and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. O
nly Count Rostov was pleased with them as he had been pleased with those of the n
aval officer, the senator, and in general with whatever speech he had last heard.
  "I think that before discussing these questions," Pierre continued, "we should 
ask the Emperormost respectfully ask His Majestyto let us know the number of our 
troops and the position in which our army and our forces now are, and then..."  B
ut scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from three side
s. The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance, a boston player who ha
d always been well disposed toward him, Stepan Stepanovich Adraksin. Adraksin was
 in uniform, and whether as a result of the uniform or from some other cause Pier
re saw before him quite a different man. With a sudden expression of malevolence 
on his aged face, Adraksin shouted at Pierre  "In the first place, I tell you we 
have no right to question the Emperor about that, and secondly, if the Russian no
bility had that right, the Emperor could not answer such a question. The troops a
re moved according to the enemy's movements and the number of men increases and d
ecreases..."  Another voice, that of a nobleman of medium height and about forty 
years of age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and knew as a bad card
player, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up to Pierre, interrupted 
Adraksin.  "Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," he continued, "but for a
cting there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroy Russia, to desecr
ate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wives and children." The nobleman 
smote his breast. "We will all arise, every one of us will go, for our father the
 Tsar!" he shouted, rolling his bloodshot eyes. Several approving voices were hea
rd in the crowd. "We are Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our
 faith, the throne, and the Fatherland! We must cease raving if we are sons of ou
r Fatherland! We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense of Russia!"  Pi
erre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt that his words, apart 
from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible than the sound of his opponent
's voice.  Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval several 
persons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of a phrase, said  "
That's right, quite right! Just so!"  Pierre wished to say that he was ready to s
acrifice his money, his serfs, or himself, only one ought to know the state of af
fairs in order to be able to improve it, but he was unable to speak. Many voices 
shouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostov had not time to signify
 his approval of them all, and the group increased, dispersed, reformed, and then
 moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall and to the big table. Not only wa
s Pierre's attempt to speak unsuccessful, but he was rudely interrupted, pushed a
side, and people turned away from him as from a common enemy. This happened not b
ecause they were displeased by the substance of his speech, which had even been f
orgotten after the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed a
 tangible object to love and a tangible object to hate. Pierre became the latter.
 Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and all in the same tone. M
any spoke eloquently and with originality.  Glinka, the editor of the Russian Mes
senger, who was recognized cries of "author! author!" were heard in the crowd, sa
id that "hell must be repulsed by hell," and that he had seen a child smiling at 
lightning flashes and thunderclaps, but "we will not be that child."  "Yes, yes, 
at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvingly in the back rows of the crowd.  The cr
owd drew up to the large table, at which sat grayhaired or bald seventyyearold ma
gnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whom Pierre had seen in their own ho
mes with their buffoons, or playing boston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of
 voices the crowd advanced to the table. Pressed by the throng against the high b
acks of the chairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two togethe
r. Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastened to su
pply it. Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to find some thought a
nd hastened to utter it. The old magnates, whom Pierre knew, sat and turned to lo
ok first at one and then at another, and their faces for the most part only expre
ssed the fact that they found it very hot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the
 general desire to show that they were ready to go to all lengthswhich found expr
ession in the tones and looks more than in the substance of the speechesinfected 
him too. He did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way to blame 
and wished to justify himself.  "I only said that it would be more to the purpose
 to make sacrifices when we know what is needed!" said he, trying to be heard abo
ve the other voices.  One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his att
ention was immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table.
  "Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!" shouted one man. 
 "He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak...." "Gentlemen,
 you are crushing me!..."      CHAPTER XXIII   At that moment Count Rostopchin wi
th his protruding chin and alert eyes, wearing the uniform of a general with sash
 over his shoulder, entered the room, stepping briskly to the front of the crowd 
of gentry.  "Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment," said Rostopchin
. "I am straight from the palace. Seeing the position we are in, I think there is
 little need for discussion. The Emperor has deigned to summon us and the merchan
ts. Millions will pour forth from there"he pointed to the merchants' hall"but our
 business is to supply men and not spare ourselves... That is the least we can do
!"  A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table. The wh
ole consultation passed more than quietly. After all the preceding noise the soun
d of their old voices saying one after another, "I agree," or for variety, "I too
 am of that opinion," and so on had even a mournful effect.  The secretary was to
ld to write down the resolution of the Moscow nobility and gentry, that they woul
d furnish ten men, fully equipped, out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk g
entry had done. Their chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had confe
rred rose with apparent relief, and began walking up and down, arm in arm, to str
etch their legs and converse in couples.  "The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cr
y resounded through the halls and the whole throng hurried to the entrance.  The 
Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines of nobles. Every 
face expressed respectful, awestruck curiosity. Pierre stood rather far off and c
ould not hear all that the Emperor said. From what he did hear he understood that
 the Emperor spoke of the danger threatening the empire and of the hopes he place
d on the Moscow nobility. He was answered by a voice which informed him of the re
solution just arrived at.  "Gentlemen!" said the Emperor with a quivering voice. 
 There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, so that Pierre disti
nctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor saying with emotion  "I nev
er doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today it has surpassed my expe
ctations. I thank you in the name of the Fatherland! Gentlemen, let us act! Time 
is most precious..."  The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd began pressing round
 him, and rapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.  "Yes, most precious.
.. a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob. He stood at the back, and, thoug
h he had heard hardly anything, understood everything in his own way.  From the h
all of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants. There he remained 
about ten minutes. Pierre was among those who saw him come out from the merchants
' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes. As became known later, he had scarcely 
begun to address the merchants before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded
 in a trembling voice. When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied 
by two merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik. The other was the m
ayor, a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard. Both were weeping. Tears fi
lled the thin man's eyes, and the fat otkupshchik sobbed outright like a child an
d kept repeating  "Our lives and propertytake them, Your Majesty!"  Pierre's one 
feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he was ready to go all lengths an
d was prepared to sacrifice everything. He now felt ashamed of his speech with it
s constitutional tendency and sought an opportunity of effacing it. Having heard 
that Count Mamonov was furnishing a regiment, Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchi
n that he would give a thousand men and their maintenance.  Old Rostov could not 
tell his wife of what had passed without tears, and at once consented to Petya's 
request and went himself to enter his name.  Next day the Emperor left Moscow. Th
e assembled nobles all took off their uniforms and settled down again in their ho
mes and clubs, and not without some groans gave orders to their stewards about th
e enrollment, feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.      BOOK TEN 1812
      CHAPTER I   Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist 
going to Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage he received
, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to the stimulating influen
ce of a June morning, and could not refrain from bursts of anger in the presence 
of Kurakin and then of Balashev.  Alexander refused negotiations because he felt 
himself to be personally insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in 
the best way, because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a great comm
ander. Rostov charged the French because he could not restrain his wish for a gal
lop across a level field and in the same way the innumerable people who took part
 in the war acted in accord with their personal characteristics, habits, circumst
ances, and aims. They were moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant, r
easoned, imagining that they knew what they were doing and did it of their own fr
ee will, but they all were involuntary tools of history, carrying on a work conce
aled from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitable fate of men of ac
tion, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchy the less are they free.  
The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personal interests have 
vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of that time but its historic resu
lts.  Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal aims, to fu
rther the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at all expectednei
ther Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of those who did the actual figh
ting.  The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to us now
. No one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advance into the hea
rt of Russia late in the season without any preparation for a winter campaign and
, on the other, the character given to the war by the burning of Russian towns an
d the hatred of the foe this aroused among the Russian people. But no one at the 
time foresaw what now seems so evident that this was the only way an army of eigh
t hundred thousand menthe best in the world and led by the best generalcould be d
estroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength, and led by i
nexperienced commanders as the Russian army was. Not only did no one see this, bu
t on the Russian side every effort was made to hinder the only thing that could s
ave Russia, while on the French side, despite Napoleon's experience and socalled 
military genius, every effort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of 
the summer, that is, to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destructio
n.  In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond of saying t
hat Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that he sought a battle and t
hat his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk, and of making similar statement
s to show that the danger of the campaign was even then understood. Russian autho
rs are still fonder of telling us that from the commencement of the campaign a Sc
ythian war plan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and this 
plan some of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certain Frenchman, others to To
ll, and others again to Alexander himselfpointing to notes, projects, and letters
 which contain hints of such a line of action. But all these hints at what happen
ed, both from the French side and the Russian, are advanced only because they fit
 in with the event. Had that event not occurred these hints would have been forgo
tten, as we have forgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations t
o the contrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because the ev
ent falsified them. There are always so many conjectures as to the issue of any e
vent that however it may end there will always be people to say "I said then that
 it would be so," quite forgetting that amid their innumerable conjectures many w
ere to quite the contrary effect.  Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the 
danger of extending his line, and on the Russian side as to luring the enemy into
 the depths of Russia, are evidently of that kind, and only by much straining can
 historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals, or such plan
s to the Russian commanders. All the facts are in flat contradiction to such conj
ectures. During the whole period of the war not only was there no wish on the Rus
sian side to draw the French into the heart of the country, but from their first 
entry into Russia everything was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not
 afraid to extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph and d
id not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.  At the ve
ry beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our sole aim was to unite th
em, though uniting the armies was no advantage if we meant to retire and lure the
 enemy into the depths of the country. Our Emperor joined the army to encourage i
t to defend every inch of Russian soil and not to retreat. The enormous Drissa ca
mp was formed on Pfuel's plan, and there was no intention of retiring farther. Th
e Emperor reproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired. He coul
d not bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach Smolensk, still less could he
 contemplate the burning of Moscow, and when our armies did unite he was displeas
ed that Smolensk was abandoned and burned without a general engagement having bee
n fought under its walls.  So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and
 people were still more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating i
nto the depths of the country.  Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far
 into the country and missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August 
he was at Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we now s
ee that advance was evidently ruinous to him.  The facts clearly show that Napole
on did not foresee the danger of the advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the
 Russian commanders then think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The
 luring of Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan
, for no one believed it to be possible it resulted from a most complex interplay
 of intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part in the war and had no p
erception whatever of the inevitable, or of the one way of saving Russia. Everyth
ing came about fortuitously. The armies were divided at the commencement of the c
ampaign. We tried to unite them, with the evident intention of giving battle and 
checking the enemy's advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoiding bat
tle with a much stronger enemy, and necessarily withdrawing the armies at an acut
e anglewe led the French on to Smolensk. But we withdrew at an acute angle not on
ly because the French advanced between our two armies the angle became still more
 acute and we withdrew still farther, because Barclay de Tolly was an unpopular f
oreigner disliked by Bagration who would come under his command, and Bagrationbei
ng in command of the second armytried to postpone joining up and coming under Bar
clay's command as long as he could. Bagration was slow in effecting the junctiont
hough that was the chief aim of all at headquartersbecause, as he alleged, he exp
osed his army to danger on this march, and it was best for him to retire more to 
the left and more to the south, worrying the enemy from flank and rear and securi
ng from the Ukraine recruits for his army and it looks as if he planned this in o
rder not to come under the command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank 
was inferior to his own.  The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his 
presence and ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers
 and plans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.  The intention was 
to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci, aiming at becoming commander in
 chief, unexpectedly employed his energy to influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whol
e plan was abandoned and the command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not
 inspire confidence his power was limited. The armies were divided, there was no 
unity of command, and Barclay was unpopular but from this confusion, division, an
d the unpopularity of the foreign commander in chief, there resulted on the one h
and indecision and the avoidance of a battle which we could not have refrained fr
om had the armies been united and had someone else, instead of Barclay, been in c
ommand and on the other an everincreasing indignation against the foreigners and 
an increase in patriotic zeal.  At last the Emperor left the army, and as the mos
t convenient and indeed the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it
 was necessary for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the natio
n in general to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscow the s
trength of the Russian army was trebled.  He left in order not to obstruct the co
mmander in chief's undivided control of the army, and hoping that more decisive a
ction would then be taken, but the command of the armies became still more confus
ed and enfeebled. Bennigsen, the Tsarevich, and a swarm of adjutants general rema
ined with the army to keep the commander in chief under observation and arouse hi
s energy, and Barclay, feeling less free than ever under the observation of all t
hese "eyes of the Emperor," became still more cautious of undertaking any decisiv
e action and avoided giving battle.  Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hin
ted at treachery and demanded a general engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlock
i, and the others of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, under pr
etext of sending papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polish adjutants general
 to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle with Bennigsen and the Tsarevich
.  At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration disliked it.  Bagra
tion drove up in a carriage to the house occupied by Barclay. Barclay donned his 
sash and came out to meet and report to his senior officer Bagration.  Despite hi
s seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest of magnanimity, took his orders fr
om Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with him less than ever. By the Emperor
's orders Bagration reported direct to him. He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor's 
confidant "It must be as my sovereign pleases, but I cannot work with the Ministe
r meaning Barclay. For God's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of a 
regiment. I cannot stand it here. Headquarters are so full of Germans that a Russ
ian cannot exist and there is no sense in anything. I thought I was really servin
g my sovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out that I am serving Barclay. I 
confess I do not want to."  The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their
 like still further embittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and
 even less unity resulted. Preparations were made to fight the French before Smol
ensk. A general was sent to survey the position. This general, hating Barclay, ro
de to visit a friend of his own, a corps commander, and, having spent the day wit
h him, returned to Barclay and condemned, as unsuitable from every point of view,
 the battleground he had not seen.  While disputes and intrigues were going on ab
out the future field of battle, and while we were looking for the Frenchhaving lo
st touch with themthe French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached the 
walls of Smolensk.  It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to
 save our lines of communication. The battle was fought and thousands were killed
 on both sides.  Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and
 of the whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitantswho had been 
misled by their governor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting an example to oth
er Russians, went to Moscow thinking only of their own losses but kindling hatred
 of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and we retired, thus arriving at the very 
result which caused his destruction.      CHAPTER II   The day after his son had 
left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary to come to his study.  "Well? Are yo
u satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with my son! Satisfied, are yo
u? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurts me, it hurts. I'm old and weak a
nd this is what you wanted. Well then, gloat over it! Gloat over it!"  After that
 Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was ill and did not le
ave his study.  Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness th
e old prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admit Mademoiselle 
Bourienne either. Tikhon alone attended him.  At the end of the week the prince r
eappeared and resumed his former way of life, devoting himself with special activ
ity to building operations and the arrangement of the gardens and completely brea
king off his relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to hi
s daughter seemed to say "There, you see? You plotted against me, you lied to Pri
nce Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him,
 but you see I need neither her nor you!"  Princess Mary spent half of every day 
with little Nicholas, watching his lessons, teaching him Russian and music hersel
f, and talking to Dessalles the rest of the day she spent over her books, with he
r old nurse, or with "God's folk" who sometimes came by the back door to see her.
  Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. She feared for h
er brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at the strange cruelty that
 impels men to kill one another, but she did not understand the significance of t
his war, which seemed to her like all previous wars. She did not realize the sign
ificance of this war, though Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed was pas
sionately interested in its progress and tried to explain his own conception of i
t to her, and though the "God's folk" who came to see her reported, in their own 
way, the rumors current among the people of an invasion by Antichrist, and though
 Julie now Princess Drubetskaya, who had resumed correspondence with her, wrote p
atriotic letters from Moscow.  "I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Ju
lie in her Frenchified Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French,
 and the same for their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We in 
Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor.  "My poor husband is endu
ring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but the news which I have inspires me ye
t more.  "You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracing his two 
sons and saying 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!' And truly th
ough the enemy was twice stronger than we, we were unshakable. We pass the time a
s we can, but in war as in war! The princesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days wi
th me, and we, unhappy widows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our 
charpie, only you, my friend, are missing..." and so on.  The chief reason Prince
ss Mary did not realize the full significance of this war was that the old prince
 never spoke of it, did not recognize it, and laughed at Dessalles when he mentio
ned it at dinner. The prince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Mary 
unhesitatingly believed him.  All that July the old prince was exceedingly active
 and even animated. He planned another garden and began a new building for the do
mestic serfs. The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was that h
e slept very little and, instead of sleeping in his study as usual, changed his s
leeping place every day. One day he would order his camp bed to be set up in the 
glass gallery, another day he remained on the couch or on the lounge chair in the
 drawing room and dozed there without undressing, whileinstead of Mademoiselle Bo
uriennea serf boy read to him. Then again he would spend a night in the dining ro
om.  On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In his first l
etter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew had dutifully asked h
is father's forgiveness for what he had allowed himself to say and begged to be r
estored to his favor. To this letter the old prince had replied affectionately, a
nd from that time had kept the Frenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew's second 
letter, written near Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town, gave a brie
f account of the whole campaign, enclosed for them a plan he had drawn and foreca
sts as to the further progress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrew pointed o
ut to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills, so near the theater of war 
and on the army's direct line of march, and advised him to move to Moscow.  At di
nner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French were said to have already
 entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his son's letter.  "There was a lette
r from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess Mary"Haven't you read it?"  "No,
 Father," she replied in a frightened voice.  She could not have read the letter 
as she did not even know it had arrived.  "He writes about this war," said the pr
ince, with the ironic smile that had become habitual to him in speaking of the pr
esent war.  "That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is in
 a position to know..."  "Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.  "G
o and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne. "You knowund
er the paperweight on the little table."  Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerl
y.  "No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."  Michael
 Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had left the room the ol
d prince, looking uneasily round, threw down his napkin and went himself.  "They 
can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.  While he was away Pr
incess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and even little Nicholas exchange
d looks in silence. The old prince returned with quick steps, accompanied by Mich
ael Ivanovich, bringing the letter and a plan. These he put down beside himnot le
tting anyone read them at dinner.  On moving to the drawing room he handed the le
tter to Princess Mary and, spreading out before him the plan of the new building 
and fixing his eyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done
 so Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining the plan, ev
idently engrossed in his own ideas.  "What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles
 ventured to ask.  "I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and no
t taking his eyes from the plan of the building.  "Very possibly the theater of w
ar will move so near to us that..."  "Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the pri
nce. "I have said and still say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy w
ill never get beyond the Niemen."  Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, w
ho was talking of the Niemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princ
ess Mary, forgetting the geographical position of the Niemen, thought that what h
er father was saying was correct.  "When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polis
h swamps. Only they could fail to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinki
ng of the campaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should have 
advanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a different turn..."  
"But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the letter mentions Vitebsk...."  "Ah, t
he letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes... yes..." His face suddenl
y took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, he writes that the French were be
aten at... at... what river is it?"  Dessalles dropped his eyes.  "The prince say
s nothing about that," he remarked gently.  "Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it m
yself."  No one spoke for a long time.  "Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," 
he suddenly went on, raising his head and pointing to the plan of the building, "
tell me how you mean to alter it...."  Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and
 the prince after speaking to him about the building looked angrily at Princess M
ary and Dessalles and went to his own room.  Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarra
ssed and astonished look fixed on her father, noticed his silence, and was struck
 by the fact that her father had forgotten his son's letter on the drawingroom ta
ble but she was not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of hi
s confusion and silence, but was afraid even to think about it.  In the evening M
ichael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to Princess Mary for Prince Andrew's l
etter which had been forgotten in the drawing room. She gave it to him and, unple
asant as it was to her to do so, ventured to ask him what her father was doing.  
"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully ironic smile which c
aused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying very much about the new building
. He has been reading a little, but now"Michael Ivanovich went on, lowering his v
oice"now he's at his desk, busy with his will, I expect." One of the prince's fav
orite occupations of late had been the preparation of some papers he meant to lea
ve at his death and which he called his "will."  "And Alpatych is being sent to S
molensk?" asked Princess Mary.  "Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some t
ime."      CHAPTER III   When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the le
tter, the old prince, with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting a
t his open bureau with screened candles, holding a paper in his outstretched hand
, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his manuscripthis "Remarks" as 
he termed itwhich was to be transmitted to the Emperor after his death.  When Mic
hael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyes evoked by the memory
 of the time when the paper he was now reading had been written. He took the lett
er from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put it in his pocket, folded up his papers, and
 called in Alpatych who had long been waiting.  The prince had a list of things t
o be bought in Smolensk and, walking up and down the room past Alpatych who stood
 by the door, he gave his instructions.  "First, notepaperdo you hear? Eight quir
es, like this sample, giltedged... it must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, s
ealing wax, as in Michael Ivanovich's list."  He paced up and down for a while an
d glanced at his notes.  "Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the 
deed."  Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to be o
f a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather case had to be o
rdered to keep the "will" in.  The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours a
nd still the prince did not let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closed hi
s eyes, and dozed off. Alpatych made a slight movement.  "Well, go, go! If anythi
ng more is wanted I'll send after you."  Alpatych went out. The prince again went
 to his bureau, glanced into it, fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, an
d sat down at the table to write to the governor.  It was already late when he ro
se after sealing the letter. He wished to sleep, but he knew he would not be able
 to and that most depressing thoughts came to him in bed. So he called Tikhon and
 went through the rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that nig
ht.  He went about looking at every corner. Every place seemed unsatisfactory, bu
t worst of all was his customary couch in the study. That couch was dreadful to h
im, probably because of the oppressive thoughts he had had when lying there. It w
as unsatisfactory everywhere, but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room
 was better than other places he had never slept there yet.  With the help of a f
ootman Tikhon brought in the bedstead and began putting it up.  "That's not right
! That's not right!" cried the prince, and himself pushed it a few inches from th
e corner and then closer in again.  "Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest,"
 thought the prince, and let Tikhon undress him.  Frowning with vexation at the e
ffort necessary to divest himself of his coat and trousers, the prince undressed,
 sat down heavily on the bed, and appeared to be meditating as he looked contempt
uously at his withered yellow legs. He was not meditating, but only deferring the
 moment of making the effort to lift those legs up and turn over on the bed. "Ugh
, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and you would release me!" thought
 he. Pressing his lips together he made that effort for the twentythousandth time
 and lay down. But hardly had he done so before he felt the bed rocking backwards
 and forwards beneath him as if it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happe
ned to him almost every night. He opened his eyes as they were closing.  "No peac
e, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. "Ah yes, there was somet
hing else important, very important, that I was keeping till I should be in bed. 
The bolts? No, I told him about them. No, it was something, something in the draw
ing room. Princess Mary talked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said somethin
g. Something in my pocketcan't remember..."  "Tikhon, what did we talk about at d
inner?"  "About Prince Michael..."  "Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his han
d on the table. "Yes, I know, Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dess
alles said something about Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."  He had the letter taken f
rom his pocket and the tableon which stood a glass of lemonade and a spiral wax c
andlemoved close to the bed, and putting on his spectacles he began reading. Only
 now in the stillness of the night, reading it by the faint light under the green
 shade, did he grasp its meaning for a moment.  "The French at Vitebsk, in four d
ays' march they may be at Smolensk perhaps are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jum
ped up. "No, no, I don't want anything!" he shouted.  He put the letter under the
 candlestick and closed his eyes. And there rose before him the Danube at bright 
noonday reeds, the Russian camp, and himself a young general without a wrinkle on
 his ruddy face, vigorous and alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and 
a burning sense of jealousy of "the favorite" agitated him now as strongly as it 
had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at that first meeting with Potemk
in. And he saw before him a plump, rather sallowfaced, short, stout woman, the Em
press Mother, with her smile and her words at her first gracious reception of him
, and then that same face on the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubov 
over her coffin about his right to kiss her hand.  "Oh, quicker, quicker! To get 
back to that time and have done with all the present! Quicker, quickerand that th
ey should leave me in peace!"      CHAPTER IV   Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolko
nski's estate, lay forty miles east from Smolensk and two miles from the main roa
d to Moscow.  The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to Alpatych,
 Dessalles, having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as the prince was n
ot very well and was taking no steps to secure his safety, though from Prince And
rew's letter it was evident that to remain at Bald Hills might be dangerous, he r
espectfully advised her to send a letter by Alpatych to the Provincial Governor a
t Smolensk, asking him to let her know the state of affairs and the extent of the
 danger to which Bald Hills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this letter to the Gover
nor for Princess Mary, she signed it, and it was given to Alpatych with instructi
ons to hand it to the Governor and to come back as quickly as possible if there w
as danger.  Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hata 
present from the princeand carrying a stick as the prince did, went out accompani
ed by his family. Three wellfed roans stood ready harnessed to a small conveyance
 with a leather hood.  The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the ha
rness stuffed with paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive with r
inging bells but on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them. His satellitesthe
 senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid, a cook, two old women, a l
ittle pageboy, the coachman, and various domestic serfswere seeing him off.  His 
daughter placed chintzcovered down cushions for him to sit on and behind his back
. His old sisterinlaw popped in a small bundle, and one of the coachmen helped hi
m into the vehicle.  "There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, p
uffing and speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.
  After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, not trying t
o imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head and crossed himself t
hree times.  "If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's sak
e think of us!" cried his wife, referring to the rumors of war and the enemy.  "W
omen, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and started on his journ
ey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the stillgreen, thickly growing
 oats, and at other quite black fields just being plowed a second time.  As he we
nt along he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid crop of corn, scrutinized
 the strips of ryefield which here and there were already being reaped, made his 
calculations as to the sowing and the harvest, and asked himself whether he had n
ot forgotten any of the prince's orders.  Having baited the horses twice on the w
ay, he arrived at the town toward evening on the fourth of August.  Alpatych kept
 meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on the road. As he approached S
molensk he heard the sounds of distant firing, but these did not impress him. Wha
t struck him most was the sight of a splendid field of oats in which a camp had b
een pitched and which was being mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder. 
This fact impressed Alpatych, but in thinking about his own business he soon forg
ot it.  All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had been bounded
 by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit. Everything not c
onnected with the execution of the prince's orders did not interest and did not e
ven exist for Alpatych.  On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of Aug
ust he put up in the Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapo
ntov, where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years. Som
e thirty years ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych's advice, had bought a wood from the p
rince, had begun to trade, and now had a house, an inn, and a corn dealer's shop 
in that province. He was a stout, dark, redfaced peasant in the forties, with thi
ck lips, a broad knob of a nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and
 a round belly.  Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standi
ng before his shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he went up to
 him.  "You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but you have 
come to it," said he.  "Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych.  "That's 
what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French."  "Women's fuss, wome
n's fuss!" said Alpatych.  "Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is orde
rs have been given not to let them in, so that must be right. And the peasants ar
e asking three rubles for cartingit isn't Christian!"  Yakov Alpatych heard witho
ut heeding. He asked for a samovar and for hay for his horses, and when he had ha
d his tea he went to bed.  All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next m
orning Alpatych donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It
 was a sunny morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot. "A good day for har
vesting," thought Alpatych.  From beyond the town firing had been heard since ear
ly morning. At eight o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musk
etry. Many people were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers,
 but cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood at their shops, and service w
as being held in the churches as usual. Alpatych went to the shops, to government
 offices, to the post office, and to the Governor's. In the offices and shops and
 at the post office everyone was talking about the army and about the enemy who w
as already attacking the town, everybody was asking what should be done, and all 
were trying to calm one another.  In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found
 a large number of people, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. 
At the porch he met two of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. This man, an e
xcaptain of police, was saying angrily  "It's no joke, you know! It's all very we
ll if you're single. 'One man though undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but
 with thirteen in your family and all the property... They've brought us to utter
 ruin! What sort of governors are they to do that? They ought to be hangedthe bri
gands!..."  "Oh come, that's enough!" said the other.  "What do I care? Let him h
ear! We're not dogs," said the excaptain of police, and looking round he noticed 
Alpatych.  "Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"  "To see the Governor by
 his excellency's order," answered Alpatych, lifting his head and proudly thrusti
ng his hand into the bosom of his coat as he always did when he mentioned the pri
nce.... "He has ordered me to inquire into the position of affairs," he added.  "
Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They've brought things to su
ch a pass that there are no carts or anything!... There it is again, do you hear?
" said he, pointing in the direction whence came the sounds of firing.  "They've 
brought us all to ruin... the brigands!" he repeated, and descended the porch ste
ps.  Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waiting room were tradesm
en, women, and officials, looking silently at one another. The door of the Govern
or's room opened and they all rose and moved forward. An official ran out, said s
ome words to a merchant, called a stout official with a cross hanging on his neck
 to follow him, and vanished again, evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring look
s and questions addressed to him. Alpatych moved forward and next time the offici
al came out addressed him, one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat, an
d handed him two letters.  "To his Honor Baron Asch, from GeneralinChief Prince B
olkonski," he announced with such solemnity and significance that the official tu
rned to him and took the letters.  A few minutes later the Governor received Alpa
tych and hurriedly said to him  "Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothi
ng I acted on the highest instructionshere..." and he handed a paper to Alpatych.
 "Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should go to Moscow. I am
 just starting myself. Inform them..."  But the Governor did not finish a dusty p
erspiring officer ran into the room and began to say something in French. The Gov
ernor's face expressed terror.  "Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and 
began questioning the officer.  Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned o
n Alpatych when he came out of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now t
o the firing, which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpatych hur
ried to his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governor said this   "I assure yo
u that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest danger as yet and it is unlik
ely that it will be threatened with any. I from the one side and Prince Bagration
 from the other are marching to unite our forces before Smolensk, which junction 
will be effected on the 22nd instant, and both armies with their united forces wi
ll defend our compatriots of the province entrusted to your care till our efforts
 shall have beaten back the enemies of our Fatherland, or till the last warrior i
n our valiant ranks has perished. From this you will see that you have a perfect 
right to reassure the inhabitants of Smolensk, for those defended by two such bra
ve armies may feel assured of victory." Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Bar
on Asch, the civil governor of Smolensk, 1812.   People were anxiously roaming ab
out the streets.  Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards
 kept emerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets. Loaded c
arts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women were wailing and lamenting
 as they said goodby. A small watchdog ran round barking in front of the harnesse
d horses.  Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and went str
aight to the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachman was asleep. He wok
e him up, told him to harness, and went into the passage. From the host's room ca
me the sounds of a child crying, the despairing sobs of a woman, and the hoarse a
ngry shouting of Ferapontov. The cook began running hither and thither in the pas
sage like a frightened hen, just as Alpatych entered.  "He's done her to death. K
illed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged her about so!..."  "What for?" asked A
lpatych.  "She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she, 
'don't let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are all gone, so
 why,' she says, 'don't we go?' And he began beating and pulling her about so!"  
At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing to hear more we
nt to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, where he had left his purcha
ses.  "You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a baby in 
her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the door at that mome
nt and down the steps into the yard.  Ferapontov came out after her, but on seein
g Alpatych adjusted his waistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpaty
ch into the opposite room.  "Going already?" said he.  Alpatych, without answerin
g or looking at his host, sorted his packages and asked how much he owed.  "We'll
 reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" asked Ferapontov. "What has b
een decided?"  Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything defin
ite.  "With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd have to pa
y seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them they're not Christians to
 ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good stroke last Thursdaysold flour to the army at
 nine rubles a sack. Will you have some tea?" he added.  While the horses were be
ing harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over their tea talked of the price of corn,
 the crops, and the good weather for harvesting.  "Well, it seems to be getting q
uieter," remarked Ferapontov, finishing his third cup of tea and getting up. "Our
s must have got the best of it. The orders were not to let them in. So we're in f
orce, it seems.... They say the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into 
the river Marina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day."  Alpatych collec
ted his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had come in, and settled up with
 the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, and bells was heard from the gateway 
as a little trap passed out.  It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the stree
t was in shadow, the other half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of t
he window and went to the door. Suddenly the strange sound of a faroff whistling 
and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dull roar that s
et the windows rattling.  He went out into the street two men were running past t
oward the bridge. From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud of cann
on balls and bursting shells falling on the town. But these sounds were hardly he
ard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside the town and attracted lit
tle attention from the inhabitants. The town was being bombarded by a hundred and
 thirty guns which Napoleon had ordered up after four o'clock. The people did not
 at once realize the meaning of this bombardment.  At first the noise of the fall
ing bombs and shells only aroused curiosity. Ferapontov's wife, who till then had
 not ceased wailing under the shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms we
nt to the gate, listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people.  Th
e cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively curiosity everyone trie
d to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew over their heads. Several peop
le came round the corner talking eagerly.  "What force!" remarked one. "Knocked t
he roof and ceiling all to splinters!"  "Routed up the earth like a pig," said an
other.  "That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky you jumped asi
de, or it would have wiped you out!"  Others joined those men and stopped and tol
d how cannon balls had fallen on a house close to them. Meanwhile still more proj
ectiles, now with the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agree
able intermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly, but n
ot one fell close by, they all flew over. Alpatych was getting into his trap. The
 innkeeper stood at the gate.  "What are you staring at?" he shouted to the cook,
 who in her red skirt, with sleeves rolled up, swinging her bare elbows, had step
ped to the corner to listen to what was being said.  "What marvels!" she exclaime
d, but hearing her master's voice she turned back, pulling down her tuckedup skir
t.  Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swooping downwards l
ike a little bird a flame flashed in the middle of the street, something exploded
, and the street was shrouded in smoke.  "Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted
 the innkeeper, rushing to the cook.  At that moment the pitiful wailing of women
 was heard from different sides, the frightened baby began to cry, and people cro
wded silently with pale faces round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was
 her wailing.  "Ohhh! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My good soul
s!..."  Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with her thig
h broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen. Alpatych, his co
achman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the house porter were all sitting in t
he cellar, listening. The roar of guns, the whistling of projectiles, and the pit
eous moaning of the cook, which rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a 
moment. The mistress rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cel
lar asked in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained i
n the street. A shopman who entered told her that her husband had gone with other
s to the cathedral, whence they were fetching the wonderworking icon of Smolensk.
  Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellar and stoppe
d in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear was clouded with smoke, 
through which, high up, the sickle of the new moon shone strangely. Now that the 
terrible din of the guns had ceased a hush seemed to reign over the town, broken 
only by the rustle of footsteps, the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle 
of fires which seemed widespread everywhere. The cook's moans had now subsided. O
n two sides black curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from the fires. Through
 the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly in different d
irections like ants from a ruined anthill. Several of them ran into Ferapontov's 
yard before Alpatych's eyes. Alpatych went out to the gate. A retreating regiment
, thronging and hurrying, blocked the street.  Noticing him, an officer said "The
 town is being abandoned. Get away, get away!" and then, turning to the soldiers,
 shouted  "I'll teach you to run into the yards!"  Alpatych went back to the hous
e, called the coachman, and told him to set off. Ferapontov's whole household cam
e out too, following Alpatych and the coachman. The women, who had been silent ti
ll then, suddenly began to wail as they looked at the firesthe smoke and even the
 flames of which could be seen in the failing twilightand as if in reply the same
 kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street. Inside the shed Al
patych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins and traces of their horses wit
h trembling hands.  As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldi
ers in Ferapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags and knapsack
s with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov returned and entered his s
hop. On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout at them, but suddenly stopped a
nd, clutching at his hair, burst into sobs and laughter  "Loot everything, lads! 
Don't let those devils get it!" he cried, taking some bags of flour himself and t
hrowing them into the street.  Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away,
 others went on filling their bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him 
 "Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place on fire myself. We
're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.  Soldiers were passing in a c
onstant stream along the street blocking it completely, so that Alpatych could no
t pass out and had to wait. Ferapontov's wife and children were also sitting in a
 cart waiting till it was possible to drive out.  Night had come. There were star
s in the sky and the new moon shone out amid the smoke that screened it. On the s
loping descent to the Dnieper Alpatych's cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, w
hich were slowly moving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to s
top. In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, a house
 and some shops were on fire. This fire was already burning itself out. The flame
s now died down and were lost in the black smoke, now suddenly flared up again br
ightly, lighting up with strange distinctness the faces of the people crowding at
 the crossroads. Black figures flitted about before the fire, and through the inc
essant crackling of the flames talking and shouting could be heard. Seeing that h
is trap would not be able to move on for some time, Alpatych got down and turned 
into the side street to look at the fire. Soldiers were continually rushing backw
ards and forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze coat drag
ging burning beams into another yard across the street, while others carried bund
les of hay.  Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which 
was blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallen in, 
the wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight. The crowd was eviden
tly watching for the roof to fall in, and Alpatych watched for it too.  "Alpatych
!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.  "Mercy on us! Your excellency!"
 answered Alpatych, immediately recognizing the voice of his young prince.  Princ
e Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was looking at Alpatych f
rom the back of the crowd.  "Why are you here?" he asked.  "Your... your excellen
cy," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs. "Are we really lost? Master!..."  "W
hy are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.  At that moment the flames flared up an
d showed his young master's pale worn face. Alpatych told how he had been sent th
ere and how difficult it was to get away.  "Are we really quite lost, your excell
ency?" he asked again.  Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and ra
ising his knee began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his sis
ter   "Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemy with
in a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once when you will star
t. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."   Having written this and given the pap
er to Alpatych, he told him how to arrange for departure of the prince, the princ
ess, his son, and the boy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately.
 Before he had had time to finish giving these instructions, a chief of staff fol
lowed by a suite galloped up to him.  "You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of s
taff with a German accent, in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set 
on fire in your presence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer f
or it!" shouted Berg, who was now assistant to the chief of staff of the commande
r of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place, as Berg said, "ve
ry agreeable and well en evidence."  Prince Andrew looked at him and without repl
ying went on speaking to Alpatych.  "So tell them that I shall await a reply till
 the tenth, and if by the tenth I don't receive news that they have all got away 
I shall have to throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills."  "Prince," sa
id Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because I have to obey orders, 
because I always do obey exactly.... You must please excuse me," he went on apolo
getically.  Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment and 
wreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was another terrible cra
sh and something huge collapsed.  "Ourourou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the crash
 of the collapsing roof of the barn, the burning grain in which diffused a cakeli
ke aroma all around. The flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted
, exhausted faces of the spectators.  The man in the frieze coat raised his arms 
and shouted  "It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!"  "That's the owner 
himself," cried several voices.  "Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych
, "report to them as I have told you" and not replying a word to Berg who was now
 mute beside him, he touched his horse and rode down the side street.      CHAPTE
R V   From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy. On th
e tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marching along the hig
hroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills. Heat and drought had continued for m
ore than three weeks. Each day fleecy clouds floated across the sky and occasiona
lly veiled the sun, but toward evening the sky cleared again and the sun set in r
eddishbrown mist. Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth. The unreaped corn w
as scorched and shed its grain. The marshes dried up. The cattle lowed from hunge
r, finding no food on the sunparched meadows. Only at night and in the forests wh
ile the dew lasted was there any freshness. But on the road, the highroad along w
hich the troops marched, there was no such freshness even at night or when the ro
ad passed through the forest the dew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned 
up more than six inches deep. As soon as day dawned the march began. The artiller
y and baggage wagons moved noiselessly through the deep dust that rose to the ver
y hubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankledeep in that soft, choking, hot 
dust that never cooled even at night. Some of this dust was kneaded by the feet a
nd wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a cloud over the troops, settling in
 eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and worst of all in the lungs of the men and bea
sts as they moved along that road. The higher the sun rose the higher rose that c
loud of dust, and through the screen of its hot fine particles one could look wit
h naked eye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the unclouded sk
y. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionless atmosphere. They marc
hed with handkerchiefs tied over their noses and mouths. When they passed through
 a village they all rushed to the wells and fought for the water and drank it dow
n to the mud.  Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of 
that regiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving and giving o
rders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolensk and its abandonment made an epoch i
n his life. A novel feeling of anger against the foe made him forget his own sorr
ow. He was entirely devoted to the affairs of his regiment and was considerate an
d kind to his men and officers. In the regiment they called him "our prince," wer
e proud of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle only to those of his reg
iment, to Timokhin and the likepeople quite new to him, belonging to a different 
world and who could not know and understand his past. As soon as he came across a
 former acquaintance or anyone from the staff, he bristled up immediately and gre
w spiteful, ironical, and contemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past 
was repugnant to him, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined
 himself to trying to do his duty and not to be unfair.  In truth everything pres
ented itself in a dark and gloomy light to Prince Andrew, especially after the ab
andonment of Smolensk on the sixth of August he considered that it could and shou
ld have been defended and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow, abando
ning to pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built and peopled. But
 despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew had something to think about
 entirely apart from general questions. Two days previously he had received news 
that his father, son, and sister had left for Moscow and though there was nothing
 for him to do at Bald Hills, Prince Andrew with a characteristic desire to fomen
t his own grief decided that he must ride there.  He ordered his horse to be sadd
led and, leaving his regiment on the march, rode to his father's estate where he 
had been born and spent his childhood. Riding past the pond where there used alwa
ys to be dozens of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with wo
oden beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and that the 
little washing wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, was floating on its
 side in the middle of the pond. He rode to the keeper's lodge. No one at the sto
ne entrance gates of the drive and the door stood open. Grass had already begun t
o grow on the garden paths, and horses and calves were straying in the English pa
rk. Prince Andrew rode up to the hothouse some of the glass panes were broken, an
d of the trees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up. He called for Ta
ras the gardener, but no one replied. Having gone round the corner of the hothous
e to the ornamental garden, he saw that the carved garden fence was broken and br
anches of the plum trees had been torn off with the fruit. An old peasant whom Pr
ince Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the gate was sitting on a green ga
rden seat, plaiting a bast shoe.  He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride
 up. He was sitting on the seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside
 him strips of bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.
  Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden had been cu
t down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front of the house among
 the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except at one window which was ope
n. A little serf boy, seeing Prince Andrew, ran into the house. Alpatych, having 
sent his family away, was alone at Bald Hills and was sitting indoors reading the
 Lives of the Saints. On hearing that Prince Andrew had come, he went out with hi
s spectacles on his nose, buttoning his coat, and, hastily stepping up, without a
 word began weeping and kissing Prince Andrew's knee.  Then, vexed at his own wea
kness, he turned away and began to report on the position of affairs. Everything 
precious and valuable had been removed to Bogucharovo. Seventy quarters of grain 
had also been carted away. The hay and the spring corn, of which Alpatych said th
ere had been a remarkable crop that year, had been commandeered by the troops and
 mown down while still green. The peasants were ruined some of them too had gone 
to Bogucharovo, only a few remained.  Without waiting to hear him out, Prince And
rew asked  "When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leave for
 Moscow.  Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure for Bo
gucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again went into details 
concerning the estate management, asking for instructions.  "Am I to let the troo
ps have the oats, and to take a receipt for them? We have still six hundred quart
ers left," he inquired.  "What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, lookin
g down on the old man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression
 on his face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questions were
 and only asked them to allay his grief.  "Yes, let them have it," replied Prince
 Andrew.  "If you noticed some disorder in the garden," said Alpatych, "it was im
possible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent the night, drago
ons mostly. I took down the name and rank of their commanding officer, to hand in
 a complaint about it."  "Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here 
if the enemy occupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.  Alpatych turned his face 
to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenly with a solemn gesture raised his ar
m.  "He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.  A group of bareheaded pea
sants was approaching across the meadow toward the prince.  "Well, goodby!" said 
Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych. "You must go away too, take away what yo
u can and tell the serfs to go to the Ryazan estate or to the one near Moscow."  
Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gently disengaging him
self, the prince spurred his horse and rode down the avenue at a gallop.  The old
 man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a fly impassive on the face
 of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last on which he was making the bast sho
e, and two little girls, running out from the hot house carrying in their skirts 
plums they had plucked from the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On seeing t
he young master, the elder one with frightened look clutched her younger companio
n by the hand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stopping to pick up some 
green plums they had dropped.  Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unw
illing to let them see that they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty f
rightened little girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistible
 desire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and relief came over him when, seein
g these girls, he realized the existence of other human interests entirely aloof 
from his own and just as legitimate as those that occupied him. Evidently these g
irls passionately desired one thingto carry away and eat those green plums withou
t being caughtand Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterp
rise. He could not resist looking at them once more. Believing their danger past,
 they sprang from their ambush and, chirruping something in their shrill little v
oices and holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned feet scampered mer
rily and quickly across the meadow grass.  Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed b
y having ridden off the dusty highroad along which the troops were moving. But no
t far from Bald Hills he again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at 
its halting place by the dam of a small pond. It was past one o'clock. The sun, a
 red ball through the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerably through his 
black coat. The dust always hung motionless above the buzz of talk that came from
 the resting troops. There was no wind. As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smell
ed the ooze and freshness of the pond. He longed to get into that water, however 
dirty it might be, and he glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of sh
rieks and laughter. The small, muddy, green pond had risen visibly more than a fo
ot, flooding the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies of soldiers w
ith brickred hands, necks, and faces, who were splashing about in it. All this na
ked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking, floundered about in that dirty poo
l like carp stuffed into a watering can, and the suggestion of merriment in that 
floundering mass rendered it specially pathetic.  One fairhaired young soldier of
 the third company, whom Prince Andrew knew and who had a strap round the calf of
 one leg, crossed himself, stepped back to get a good run, and plunged into the w
ater another, a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to h
is waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snorted with sat
isfaction as he poured the water over his head with hands blackened to the wrists
. There were sounds of men slapping one another, yelling, and puffing.  Everywher
e on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy, white, muscular fl
esh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red little nose, standing on the dam wiping 
himself with a towel, felt confused at seeing the prince, but made up his mind to
 address him nevertheless.  "It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like t
o?" said he.  "It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.  "We'll clea
r it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, still undressed, ran off to cl
ear the men out of the pond.  "The prince wants to bathe."  "What prince? Ours?" 
said many voices, and the men were in such haste to clear out that the prince cou
ld hardly stop them. He decided that he would rather wash himself with water in t
he barn.  "Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, and he looked at his own na
ked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust and horror he d
id not himself understand, aroused by the sight of that immense number of bodies 
splashing about in the dirty pond.   On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wr
ote as follows from his quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road   Dear Count
 Alexis AndreevichHe was writing to Arakcheev but knew that his letter would be r
ead by the Emperor, and therefore weighed every word in it to the best of his abi
lity.  I expect the Minister Barclay de Tolly has already reported the abandonmen
t of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and the whole army is in desp
air that this most important place has been wantonly abandoned. I, for my part, b
egged him personally most urgently and finally wrote him, but nothing would induc
e him to consent. I swear to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as n
ever before and might have lost half his army but could not have taken Smolensk. 
Our troops fought, and are fighting, as never before. With fifteen thousand men I
 held the enemy at bay for thirtyfive hours and beat him but he would not hold ou
t even for fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a stain on our army, and as for him
, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If he reports that our losses were great
, it is not true perhaps about four thousand, not more, and not even that but eve
n were they ten thousand, that's war! But the enemy has lost masses...  What woul
d it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They would have had to retir
e of their own accord, for they had no water for men or horses. He gave me his wo
rd he would not retreat, but suddenly sent instructions that he was retiring that
 night. We cannot fight in this way, or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow... 
 There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that you should make
 peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! You would set all Russi
a against you and every one of us would feel ashamed to wear the uniform. If it h
as come to thiswe must fight as long as Russia can and as long as there are men a
ble to stand...  One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may p
erhaps be good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad but execrable
, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... I am really frantic w
ith vexation forgive my writing boldly. It is clear that the man who advocates th
e conclusion of a peace, and that the Minister should command the army, does not 
love our sovereign and desires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly call ou
t the militia. For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscow in 
a most masterly way. The whole army feels great suspicion of the Imperial aidedec
amp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon's man than ours, and he is always ad
vising the Minister. I am not merely civil to him but obey him like a corporal, t
hough I am his senior. This is painful, but, loving my benefactor and sovereign, 
I submit. Only I am sorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such 
as he. Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the hospi
tal more than fifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this would not have happe
ned. Tell me, for God's sake, what will Russia, our mother Russia, say to our bei
ng so frightened, and why are we abandoning our good and gallant Fatherland to su
ch rabble and implanting feelings of hatred and shame in all our subjects? What a
re we scared at and of whom are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is
 vacillating, a coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The whole arm
y bewails it and calls down curses upon him...      CHAPTER VI   Among the innume
rable categories applicable to the phenomena of human life one may discriminate b
etween those in which substance prevails and those in which form prevails. To the
 latteras distinguished from village, country, provincial, or even Moscow lifewe 
may allot Petersburg life, and especially the life of its salons. That life of th
e salons is unchanging. Since the year 1805 we had made peace and had again quarr
eled with Bonaparte and had made constitutions and unmade them again, but the sal
ons of Anna Pavlovna and Helene remained just as they had beenthe one seven and t
he other five years before. At Anna Pavlovna's they talked with perplexity of Bon
aparte's successes just as before and saw in them and in the subservience shown t
o him by the European sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which
 was to cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Anna Pavlov
na was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsev himself honore
d with his visits, regarding Helene as a remarkably intelligent woman, they talke
d with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808 of the "great nation" and the "great m
an," and regretted our rupture with France, a rupture which, according to them, o
ught to be promptly terminated by peace.  Of late, since the Emperor's return fro
m the army, there had been some excitement in these conflicting salon circles and
 some demonstrations of hostility to one another, but each camp retained its own 
tendency. In Anna Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were d
eeprooted legitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the effect that one 
ought not to go to the French theater and that to maintain the French troupe was 
costing the government as much as a whole army corps. The progress of the war was
 eagerly followed, and only the reports most flattering to our army were circulat
ed. In the French circle of Helene and Rumyantsev the reports of the cruelty of t
he enemy and of the war were contradicted and all Napoleon's attempts at concilia
tion were discussed. In that circle they discountenanced those who advised hurrie
d preparations for a removal to Kazan of the court and the girls' educational est
ablishments under the patronage of the Dowager Empress. In Helene's circle the wa
r in general was regarded as a series of formal demonstrations which would very s
oon end in peace, and the view prevailed expressed by Bilibinwho now in Petersbur
g was quite at home in Helene's house, which every clever man was obliged to visi
tthat not by gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters be settled. In 
that circle the Moscow enthusiasmnews of which had reached Petersburg simultaneou
sly with the Emperor's returnwas ridiculed sarcastically and very cleverly, thoug
h with much caution.  Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by th
is enthusiasm and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients. Pr
ince Vasili, who still occupied his former important posts, formed a connecting l
ink between these two circles. He visited his "good friend Anna Pavlovna" as well
 as his daughter's "diplomatic salon," and often in his constant comings and goin
gs between the two camps became confused and said at Helene's what he should have
 said at Anna Pavlovna's and vice versa.  Soon after the Emperor's return Prince 
Vasili in a conversation about the war at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barc
lay de Tolly, but was undecided as to who ought to be appointed commander in chie
f. One of the visitors, usually spoken of as "a man of great merit," having descr
ibed how he had that day seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of the Petersburg m
ilitia, presiding over the enrollment of recruits at the Treasury, cautiously ven
tured to suggest that Kutuzov would be the man to satisfy all requirements.  Anna
 Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had done nothing but caus
e the Emperor annoyance.  "I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobili
ty," Prince Vasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them his e
lection as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. They did not listen
 to me.  "It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? It is al
l because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites," Prince Vasi
li continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Helene's one had to ridicule
 the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had to be ecstatic about it. But h
e retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is it suitable that Count Kutuzov, the old
est general in Russia, should preside at that tribunal? He will get nothing for h
is pains! How could they make a man commander in chief who cannot mount a horse, 
who drops asleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A good reputation h
e made for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of his capacity as a general, but 
at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit, blind old man, positively blind?
 A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't see anything. To play blindman's b
luff? He can't see at all!"  No one replied to his remarks.  This was quite corre
ct on the twentyfourth of July. But on the twentyninth of July Kutuzov received t
he title of Prince. This might indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore P
rince Vasili's opinion continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry
 to express it. But on the eighth of August a committee, consisting of Field Mars
hal Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to consider the 
progress of the war. This committee came to the conclusion that our failures were
 due to a want of unity in the command and though the members of the committee we
re aware of the Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov, after a short deliberation they agr
eed to advise his appointment as commander in chief. That same day Kutuzov was ap
pointed commander in chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole re
gion occupied by them.  On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's a
gain met the "man of great merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovna
 because he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educational establishme
nts for young ladies. Prince Vasili entered the room with the air of a happy conq
ueror who has attained the object of his desires.  "Well, have you heard the grea
t news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal! All dissensions are at an end! I am so g
lad, so delighted! At last we have a man!" said he, glancing sternly and signific
antly round at everyone in the drawing room.  The "man of great merit," despite h
is desire to obtain the post of director, could not refrain from reminding Prince
 Vasili of his former opinion. Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna 
Pavlovna's drawing room, and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received the n
ews with delight, he could not resist the temptation.  "But, Prince, they say he 
is blind!" said he, reminding Prince Vasili of his own words.  "Eh? Nonsense! He 
sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in a deep voice and with a slight 
coughthe voice and cough with which he was wont to dispose of all difficulties.  
"He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about," he went on, "i
s that our sovereign has given him full powers over all the armies and the whole 
regionpowers no commander in chief ever had before. He is a second autocrat," he 
concluded with a victorious smile.  "God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlo
vna.  The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles, wishing 
to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position on this question, obser
ved  "It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers. The
y say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said to Kutuzov 'Yo
ur Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.'"  "Perhaps the heart took no
 part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.  "Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince 
Vasili, who would not now yield Kutuzov to anyone in his opinion Kutuzov was not 
only admirable himself, but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," sai
d he, "for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before."  "God grant only that
 Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does not allow anyone to put a spoke in hi
s wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.  Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Pri
nce Vasili said in a whisper  "I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute
 condition that the Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he sa
id to the Emperor?"  And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been s
poken by Kutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor r
eward him if he does right."  "Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have know
n him a long time!"  "They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did n
ot yet possess courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express condition th
at the sovereign himself should not be with the army."  As soon as he said this b
oth Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away from him and glanced sadly at one
 another with a sigh at his naivete.      CHAPTER VII   While this was taking pla
ce in Petersburg the French had already passed Smolensk and were drawing nearer a
nd nearer to Moscow. Napoleon's historian Thiers, like other of his historians, t
rying to justify his hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against h
is will. He is as right as other historians who look for the explanation of histo
ric events in the will of one man he is as right as the Russian historians who ma
intain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of the Russian commanders. 
Here besides the law of retrospection, which regards all the past as a preparatio
n for events that subsequently occur, the law of reciprocity comes in, confusing 
the whole matter. A good chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced th
at his loss resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the ope
ning, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar mistakes and 
that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices the mistake to which he pays
 attention, because his opponent took advantage of it. How much more complex than
 this is the game of war, which occurs under certain limits of time, and where it
 is not one will that manipulates lifeless objects, but everything results from i
nnumerable conflicts of various wills!  After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle b
eyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, and then at TsarevoZaymishche, but it happened that o
wing to a conjunction of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give ba
ttle till they reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleon 
ordered a direct advance on Moscow.  Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand em
pire, la ville sacree des peuples d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglis
es en forme de pagodes chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no re
st. On the march from Vyazma to TsarevoZaymishche he rode his light bay bobtailed
 ambler accompanied by his Guards, his bodyguard, his pages, and aidesdecamp. Ber
thier, his chief of staff, dropped behind to question a Russian prisoner captured
 by the cavalry. Followed by Lelorgne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Nap
oleon at a gallop and reined in his horse with an amused expression.        * "Mo
scow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the      sacred city of Alexander
's people, Moscow with its      innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas.
"   "Well?" asked Napoleon.  "One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps i
s joining up with the main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander in 
chief. He is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow."  Napoleon smiled and told them 
to give the Cossack a horse and bring the man to him. He wished to talk to him hi
mself. Several adjutants galloped off, and an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Den
isov had handed over to Rostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on
 a French cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to ride
 by his side and began questioning him.  "You are a Cossack?"  "Yes, a Cossack, y
our Honor."  "The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon's pla
in appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind the pres
ence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of the incidents of the war," 
says Thiers, narrating this episode. In reality Lavrushka, having got drunk the d
ay before and left his master dinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the villag
e in quest of chickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took him pris
oner. Lavrushka was one of those coarse, barefaced lackeys who have seen all sort
s of things, consider it necessary to do everything in a mean and cunning way, ar
e ready to render any sort of service to their master, and are keen at guessing t
heir master's baser impulses, especially those prompted by vanity and pettiness. 
 Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easily and sur
ely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely did his utmost 
to gain his new master's favor.  He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Na
poleon's presence could no more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major
's with the rods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant ma
jor or Napoleon could deprive him of.  So he rattled on, telling all the gossip h
e had heard among the orderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whe
ther the Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed up 
his eyes and considered.  In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his t
ype see cunning in everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.  "It
's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yours will win. T
hat's right. But if three days pass, then after that, well, then that same battle
 will not soon be over."  Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech t
o Napoleon thus "If a battle takes place within the next three days the French wi
ll win, but if later, God knows what will happen." Napoleon did not smile, though
 he was evidently in high good humor, and he ordered these words to be repeated. 
 Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not to know who 
Napoleon was, added  "We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten ever
ybody in the world, but we are a different matter..."without knowing why or how t
his bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.  The interpreter translate
d these words without the last phrase, and Bonaparte smiled. "The young Cossack m
ade his mighty interlocutor smile," says Thiers. After riding a few paces in sile
nce, Napoleon turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he w
as talking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who had written his immor
tally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant du Don. *       *
 "Child of the Don."   The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.  Lavrushka
, understanding that this was done to perplex him and that Napoleon expected him 
to be frightened, to gratify his new masters promptly pretended to be astonished 
and awestruck, opened his eyes wide, and assumed the expression he usually put on
 when taken to be whipped. "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says T
hiers, "the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word, but rode on
, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across the steppes o
f the East. All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and replaced by a naive and s
ilent feeling of admiration. Napoleon, after making the Cossack a present, had hi
m set free like a bird restored to its native fields."  Napoleon rode on, dreamin
g of the Moscow that so appealed to his imagination, and "the bird restored to it
s native fields" galloped to our outposts, inventing on the way all that had not 
taken place but that he meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken pl
ace he did not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling. He foun
d the Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operating with Platov's detachment and 
by evening found his master, Nicholas Rostov, quartered at Yankovo. Rostov was ju
st mounting to go for a ride round the neighboring villages with Ilyin he let Lav
rushka have another horse and took him along with him.      CHAPTER VIII   Prince
ss Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew supposed.  After the
 return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly seemed to awake as from
 a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be called up from the villages and armed, 
and wrote a letter to the commander in chief informing him that he had resolved t
o remain at Bald Hills to the last extremity and to defend it, leaving to the com
mander in chief's discretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hill
s, where one of Russia's oldest generals would be captured or killed, and he anno
unced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills.  But while himself rem
aining, he gave instructions for the departure of the princess and Dessalles with
 the little prince to Bogucharovo and thence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by
 her father's feverish and sleepless activity after his previous apathy, could no
t bring herself to leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to
 disobey him. She refused to go away and her father's fury broke over her in a te
rrible storm. He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on her. Trying to
 convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had caused his quarrel with his s
on, had harbored nasty suspicions of him, making it the object of her life to poi
son his existence, and he drove her from his study telling her that if she did no
t go away it was all the same to him. He declared that he did not wish to remembe
r her existence and warned her not to dare to let him see her. The fact that he d
id not, as she had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told he
r not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof that in t
he depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and had not gone away.
  The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned his full unif
orm and prepared to visit the commander in chief. His caleche was already at the 
door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in his uniform wearing all his 
orders and go down the garden to review his armed peasants and domestic serfs. Sh
e sat by the window listening to his voice which reached her from the garden. Sud
denly several men came running up the avenue with frightened faces.  Princess Mar
y ran out to the porch, down the flowerbordered path, and into the avenue. A larg
e crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving toward her, and in their midst se
veral men were supporting by the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a
 uniform and decorations. She ran up to him and, in the play of the sunlight that
 fell in small round spots through the shade of the limetree avenue, could not be
 sure what change there was in his face. All she could see was that his former st
ern and determined expression had altered to one of timidity and submission. On s
eeing his daughter he moved his helpless lips and made a hoarse sound. It was imp
ossible to make out what he wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and l
aid on the very couch he had so feared of late.  The doctor, who was fetched that
 same night, bled him and said that the prince had had a seizure paralyzing his r
ight side.  It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, and 
next day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanying him.  By t
he time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the little prince had already lef
t for Moscow.  For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the ne
w house Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same state, getting n
either better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like a distorted corpse. He m
uttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lips twitching, and it was impossible to te
ll whether he understood what was going on around him or not. One thing was certa
inthat he was suffering and wished to say something. But what it was, no one coul
d tell it might be some caprice of a sick and halfcrazy man, or it might relate t
o public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.  The doctor said this restlessn
ess did not mean anything and was due to physical causes but Princess Mary though
t he wished to tell her something, and the fact that her presence always increase
d his restlessness confirmed her opinion.  He was evidently suffering both physic
ally and mentally. There was no hope of recovery. It was impossible for him to tr
avel, it would not do to let him die on the road. "Would it not be better if the 
end did come, the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and day, hard
ly sleeping at all, she watched him and, terrible to say, often watched him not w
ith hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to find symptoms of the appr
oach of the end.  Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself
, yet there it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since her
 father's illness began perhaps even sooner, when she stayed with him expecting s
omething to happen, all the personal desires and hopes that had been forgotten or
 sleeping within her had awakened. Thoughts that had not entered her mind for yea
rsthoughts of a life free from the fear of her father, and even the possibility o
f love and of family happinessfloated continually in her imagination like temptat
ions of the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions continually recurred
 to her as to how she would order her life now, after that. These were temptation
s of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knew that the sole weapon against h
im was prayer, and she tried to pray. She assumed an attitude of prayer, looked a
t the icons, repeated the words of a prayer, but she could not pray. She felt tha
t a different world had now taken possession of herthe life of a world of strenuo
us and free activity, quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she 
had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had been prayer. She could no
t pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took possession of her.  It was becomin
g dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of the approach of the French came fro
m all sides, and in one village, ten miles from Bogucharovo, a homestead had been
 looted by French marauders.  The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the 
prince the provincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary t
o persuade her to get away as quickly as possible, and the head of the rural poli
ce having come to Bogucharovo urged the same thing, saying that the French were o
nly some twentyfive miles away, that French proclamations were circulating in the
 villages, and that if the princess did not take her father away before the fifte
enth, he could not answer for the consequences.  The princess decided to leave on
 the fifteenth. The cares of preparation and giving orders, for which everyone ca
me to her, occupied her all day. She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual, 
without undressing, in the room next to the one where the prince lay. Several tim
es, waking up, she heard his groans and muttering, the creak of his bed, and the 
steps of Tikhon and the doctor when they turned him over. Several times she liste
ned at the door, and it seemed to her that his mutterings were louder than usual 
and that they turned him over oftener. She could not sleep and several times went
 to the door and listened, wishing to enter but not deciding to do so. Though he 
did not speak, Princess Mary saw and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on
 his account was to him. She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from
 the look she sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in du
ring the night at an unusual hour would irritate him.  But never had she felt so 
grieved for him or so much afraid of losing him. She recalled all her life with h
im and in every word and act of his found an expression of his love of her. Occas
ionally amid these memories temptations of the devil would surge into her imagina
tion thoughts of how things would be after his death, and how her new, liberated 
life would be ordered. But she drove these thoughts away with disgust. Toward mor
ning he became quiet and she fell asleep.  She woke late. That sincerity which of
ten comes with waking showed her clearly what chiefly concerned her about her fat
her's illness. On waking she listened to what was going on behind the door and, h
earing him groan, said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same.  "
But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!" she cried with 
a feeling of loathing for herself.  She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and we
nt out to the porch. In front of it stood carriages without horses and things wer
e being packed into the vehicles.  It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary sto
pped at the porch, still horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrang
e her thoughts before going to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went ou
t to her.  "He is a little better today," said he. "I was looking for you. One ca
n make out something of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come in, he is as
king for you..."  Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she g
rew pale and leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk to hi
m, feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with those dreadf
ul, wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and terror.  "Come," said the doctor
.  Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He was lying o
n his back propped up high, and his small bony hands with their knotted purple ve
ins were lying on the quilt his left eye gazed straight before him, his right eye
 was awry, and his brows and lips motionless. He seemed altogether so thin, small
, and pathetic. His face seemed to have shriveled or melted his features had grow
n smaller. Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left hand pressed hers 
so that she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come. He twitched
 her hand, and his brows and lips quivered angrily.  She looked at him in dismay 
trying to guess what he wanted of her. When she changed her position so that his 
left eye could see her face he calmed down, not taking his eyes off her for some 
seconds. Then his lips and tongue moved, sounds came, and he began to speak, gazi
ng timidly and imploringly at her, evidently afraid that she might not understand
.  Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comic efforts wit
h which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with difficulty repress th
e sobs that rose to her throat. He said something, repeating the same words sever
al times. She could not understand them, but tried to guess what he was saying an
d inquiringly repeated the words he uttered.  "Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeat
ed several times.  It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor
 thought he had guessed them, and inquiringly repeated "Mary, are you afraid?" Th
e prince shook his head, again repeated the same sounds.  "My mind, my mind aches
?" questioned Princess Mary.  He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this, t
ook her hand, and began pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying
 to find the right place for it.  "Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." h
e then uttered much more clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of
 being understood.  Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand, trying to hi
de her sobs and tears.  He moved his hand over her hair.  "I have been calling yo
u all night..." he brought out.  "If only I had known..." she said through her te
ars. "I was afraid to come in."  He pressed her hand.  "Weren't you asleep?"  "No
, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shaking her head.  Unconsciously imitatin
g her father, she now tried to express herself as he did, as much as possible by 
signs, and her tongue too seemed to move with difficulty.  "Dear one... Dearest..
." Princess Mary could not quite make out what he had said, but from his look it 
was clear that he had uttered a tender caressing word such as he had never used t
o her before. "Why didn't you come in?"  "And I was wishing for his death!" thoug
ht Princess Mary.  He was silent awhile.  "Thank you... daughter dear!... for all
, for all... forgive!... thank you!... forgive!... thank you!..." and tears began
 to flow from his eyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish, timid ex
pression of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.  He himself seemed aware
 that his demand was meaningless. So at least it seemed to Princess Mary.  "I hav
e a letter from him," she replied.  He glanced at her with timid surprise.  "Wher
e is he?"  "He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."  He closed his eyes and rem
ained silent a long time. Then as if in answer to his doubts and to confirm the f
act that now he understood and remembered everything, he nodded his head and reop
ened his eyes.  "Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They
've destroyed her."  And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. P
rincess Mary could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his fac
e.  Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, and Tikhon
, understanding him, wiped away the tears.  Then he again opened his eyes and sai
d something none of them could understand for a long time, till at last Tikhon un
derstood and repeated it. Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in th
e mood in which he had just been speaking. She thought he was speaking of Russia,
 or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and so she c
ould not guess his words.  "Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said
.  Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctor takin
g her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying to persuade her to 
prepare for her journey. When she had left the room the prince again began speaki
ng about his son, about the war, and about the Emperor, angrily twitching his bro
ws and raising his hoarse voice, and then he had a second and final stroke.  Prin
cess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot and sunny. She c
ould understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing, except passionate lov
e for her father, love such as she thought she had never felt till that moment. S
he ran out sobbing into the garden and as far as the pond, along the avenues of y
oung lime trees Prince Andrew had planted.  "Yes... I... I... I wished for his de
ath! Yes, I wanted it to end quicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what wil
l become of me? What use will peace be when he is no longer here?" Princess Mary 
murmured, pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her boso
m which heaved with convulsive sobs.  When she had completed the tour of the gard
en, which brought her again to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bouriennewho had r
emained at Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave itcoming toward her with a stran
ger. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who had come personall
y to point out to the princess the necessity for her prompt departure. Princess M
ary listened without understanding him she led him to the house, offered him lunc
h, and sat down with him. Then, excusing herself, she went to the door of the old
 prince's room. The doctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not 
enter.  "Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"  She returned to the garden and 
sat down on the grass at the foot of the slope by the pond, where no one could se
e her. She did not know how long she had been there when she was aroused by the s
ound of a woman's footsteps running along the path. She rose and saw Dunyasha her
 maid, who was evidently looking for her, and who stopped suddenly as if in alarm
 on seeing her mistress.  "Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in
 a breaking voice.  "Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princess h
urriedly, not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, and trying to a
void seeing the girl she ran toward the house.  "Princess, it's God's will! You m
ust be prepared for everything," said the Marshal, meeting her at the house door.
  "Let me alone it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.  The doctor tried to st
op her. She pushed him aside and ran to her father's door. "Why are these people 
with frightened faces stopping me? I don't want any of them! And what are they do
ing here?" she thought. She opened the door and the bright daylight in that previ
ously darkened room startled her. In the room were her nurse and other women. The
y all drew back from the bed, making way for her. He was still lying on the bed a
s before, but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess Mary stop shor
t on the threshold.  "No, he's not deadit's impossible!" she told herself and app
roached him, and repressing the terror that seized her, she pressed her lips to h
is cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All the force of the tenderness she h
ad been feeling for him vanished instantly and was replaced by a feeling of horro
r at what lay there before her. "No, he is no more! He is not, but here where he 
was is something unfamiliar and hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent
 mystery!" And hiding her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms of 
the doctor, who held her up.   In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women
 washed what had been the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the m
outh should not stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together t
he legs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniform with 
his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table. Heaven only know
s who arranged all this and when, but it all got done as if of its own accord. To
ward night candles were burning round his coffin, a pall was spread over it, the 
floor was strewn with sprays of juniper, a printed band was tucked in under his s
hriveled head, and in a corner of the room sat a chanter reading the psalms.  Jus
t as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so the inmates of the ho
use and strangers crowded into the drawing room round the coffinthe Marshal, the 
village Elder, peasant womenand all with fixed and frightened eyes, crossing them
selves, bowed and kissed the old prince's cold and stiffened hand.      CHAPTER I
X   Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always been absente
es, and its peasants were of quite a different character from those of Bald Hills
. They differed from them in speech, dress, and disposition. They were called ste
ppe peasants. The old prince used to approve of them for their endurance at work 
when they came to Bald Hills to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditche
s, but he disliked them for their boorishness.  Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogu
charovo, when he introduced hospitals and schools and reduced the quitrent the pe
asants had to pay, had not softened their disposition but had on the contrary str
engthened in them the traits of character the old prince called boorishness. Vari
ous obscure rumors were always current among them at one time a rumor that they w
ould all be enrolled as Cossacks at another of a new religion to which they were 
all to be converted then of some proclamation of the Tsar's and of an oath to the
 Tsar Paul in 1797 in connection with which it was rumored that freedom had been 
granted them but the landowners had stopped it, then of Peter Fedorovich's return
 to the throne in seven years' time, when everything would be made free and so "s
imple" that there would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and 
his invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague notions of
 Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."  In the vicinity of Boguch
arovo were large villages belonging to the crown or to owners whose serfs paid qu
itrent and could work where they pleased. There were very few resident landlords 
in the neighborhood and also very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the live
s of the peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of the
 Russian people, the causes and meaning of which are so baffling to contemporarie
s, were more clearly and strongly noticeable than among others. One instance, whi
ch had occurred some twenty years before, was a movement among the peasants to em
igrate to some unknown "warm rivers." Hundreds of peasants, among them the Boguch
arovo folk, suddenly began selling their cattle and moving in whole families towa
rd the southeast. As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea, so these men with
 their wives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts where none of them 
had ever been. They set off in caravans, bought their freedom one by one or ran a
way, and drove or walked toward the "warm rivers." Many of them were punished, so
me sent to Siberia, many died of cold and hunger on the road, many returned of th
eir own accord, and the movement died down of itself just as it had sprung up, wi
thout apparent reason. But such undercurrents still existed among the people and 
gathered new forces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly,
 and at the same time simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone liv
ing in close touch with these people it was apparent that these undercurrents wer
e acting strongly and nearing an eruption.  Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo
 shortly before the old prince's death, noticed an agitation among the peasants, 
and that contrary to what was happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a 
radius of forty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their village
s to be devastated by the Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe region round Boguc
harovo were, it was rumored, in touch with the French, received leaflets from the
m that passed from hand to hand, and did not migrate. He learned from domestic se
rfs loyal to him that the peasant Karp, who possessed great influence in the vill
age commune and had recently been away driving a government transport, had return
ed with news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but that the Fr
ench did not harm them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous day another peasa
nt had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, which was occupied by the Fr
ench, a proclamation by a French general that no harm would be done to the inhabi
tants, and if they remained they would be paid for anything taken from them. As p
roof of this the peasant had brought from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes h
e did not know that they were false paid to him in advance for hay.  More importa
nt still, Alpatych learned that on the morning of the very day he gave the villag
e Elder orders to collect carts to move the princess' luggage from Bogucharovo, t
here had been a village meeting at which it had been decided not to move but to w
ait. Yet there was no time to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince'
s death, the Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it was b
ecoming dangerous. He had told her that after the sixteenth he could not be respo
nsible for what might happen. On the evening of the day the old prince died the M
arshal went away, promising to return next day for the funeral. But this he was u
nable to do, for he received tidings that the French had unexpectedly advanced, a
nd had barely time to remove his own family and valuables from his estate.  For s
ome thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder, Dron, whom th
e old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."  Dron was one of those physica
lly and mentally vigorous peasants who grow big beards as soon as they are of age
 and go on unchanged till they are sixty or seventy, without a gray hair or the l
oss of a tooth, as straight and strong at sixty as at thirty.  Soon after the mig
ration to the "warm rivers," in which he had taken part like the rest, Dron was m
ade village Elder and overseer of Bogucharovo, and had since filled that post irr
eproachably for twentythree years. The peasants feared him more than they did the
ir master. The masters, both the old prince and the young, and the steward respec
ted him and jestingly called him "the Minister." During the whole time of his ser
vice Dron had never been drunk or ill, never after sleepless nights or the hardes
t tasks had he shown the least fatigue, and though he could not read he had never
 forgotten a single money account or the number of quarters of flour in any of th
e endless cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corn 
crop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields.  Alpatych, arriving from the d
evastated Bald Hills estate, sent for his Dron on the day of the prince's funeral
 and told him to have twelve horses got ready for the princess' carriages and eig
hteen carts for the things to be removed from Bogucharovo. Though the peasants pa
id quitrent, Alpatych thought no difficulty would be made about complying with th
is order, for there were two hundred and thirty households at work in Bogucharovo
 and the peasants were well to do. But on hearing the order Dron lowered his eyes
 and remained silent. Alpatych named certain peasants he knew, from whom he told 
him to take the carts.  Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away 
carting. Alpatych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horses av
ailable some horses were carting for the government, others were too weak, and ot
hers had died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horses could be had even for 
the carriages, much less for the carting.  Alpatych looked intently at Dron and f
rowned. Just as Dron was a model village Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the p
rince's estates for twenty years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in t
he highest degree the faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dea
lt with. Having glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers did not ex
press his personal views but the general mood of the Bogucharovo commune, by whic
h the Elder had already been carried away. But he also knew that Dron, who had ac
quired property and was hated by the commune, must be hesitating between the two 
camps the masters' and the serfs'. He noticed this hesitation in Dron's look and 
therefore frowned and moved closer up to him.  "Now just listen, Dronushka," said
 he. "Don't talk nonsense to me. His excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me ord
ers to move all the people away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is a
n order from the Tsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do
 you hear?"  "I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.  Alpatych was not 
satisfied with this reply.  "Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking 
his head.  "The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.  "Eh, Dron, drop it
!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand from his bosom and solemnly pointing t
o the floor at Dron's feet. "I can see through you and three yards into the groun
d under you," he continued, gazing at the floor in front of Dron.  Dron was disco
ncerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and again lowered his eyes.  "You drop thi
s nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave their homes and go to Moscow
 and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning for the princess' things. And don't 
go to any meeting yourself, do you hear?"  Dron suddenly fell on his knees.  "Yak
ov Alpatych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and discharge me, for Christ's s
ake!"  "Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and three yards un
der you," he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, his knowledge of the
 right time to sow the oats, and the fact that he had been able to retain the old
 prince's favor for twenty years had long since gained him the reputation of bein
g a wizard, and that the power of seeing three yards under a man is considered an
 attribute of wizards.  Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych 
interrupted him.  "What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you t
hinking of, eh?"  "What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quite be
side themselves I have already told them..."  "'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alp
atych. "Are they drinking?" he asked abruptly.  "Quite beside themselves, Yakov A
lpatych they've fetched another barrel."  "Well, then, listen! I'll go to the pol
ice officer, and you tell them so, and that they must stop this and the carts mus
t be got ready."  "I understand."  Alpatych did not insist further. He had manage
d people for a long time and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show
 no suspicion that they can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "I unders
tand" from Dron, Alpatych contented himself with that, though he not only doubted
 but felt almost certain that without the help of troops the carts would not be f
orthcoming.  And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided. In 
the village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, which decide
d that the horses should be driven out into the woods and the carts should not be
 provided. Without saying anything of this to the princess, Alpatych had his own 
belongings taken out of the carts which had arrived from Bald Hills and had those
 horses got ready for the princess' carriages. Meanwhile he went himself to the p
olice authorities.      CHAPTER X   After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut
 herself up in her room and did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say 
that Alpatych was asking for orders about their departure. This was before his ta
lk with Dron. Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had been lyin
g and replied through the closed door that she did not mean to go away and begged
 to be left in peace.  The windows of the room in which she was lying looked west
ward. She lay on the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of the
 leather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confused thoughts w
ere centered on one subjectthe irrevocability of death and her own spiritual base
ness, which she had not suspected, but which had shown itself during her father's
 illness. She wished to pray but did not dare to, dared not in her present state 
of mind address herself to God. She lay for a long time in that position.  The su
n had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting rays shone into the o
pen window, lighting up the room and part of the morocco cushion at which Princes
s Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughts suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she 
sat up, smoothed her hair, got up, and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling
 the freshness of the clear but windy evening.  "Yes, you can well enjoy the even
ing now! He is gone and no one will hinder you," she said to herself, and sinking
 into a chair she let her head fall on the window sill.  Someone spoke her name i
n a soft and tender voice from the garden and kissed her head. She looked up. It 
was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a black dress and weepers. She softly approached Pr
incess Mary, sighed, kissed her, and immediately began to cry. The princess looke
d up at her. All their former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her min
d. But she remembered too how he had changed of late toward Mademoiselle Bourienn
e and could not bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust were the reproaches P
rincess Mary had mentally addressed to her. "Besides, is it for me, for me who de
sired his death, to condemn anyone?" she thought.  Princess Mary vividly pictured
 to herself the position of Mademoiselle Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at 
a distance, but who yet was dependent on her and living in her house. She felt so
rry for her and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. Mademoiselle B
ourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking of the princes
s' sorrow and making herself a partner in it. She said her only consolation was t
he fact that the princess allowed her to share her sorrow, that all the old misun
derstandings should sink into nothing but this great grief that she felt herself 
blameless in regard to everyone, and that he, from above, saw her affection and g
ratitude. The princess heard her, not heeding her words but occasionally looking 
up at her and listening to the sound of her voice.  "Your position is doubly terr
ible, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne after a pause. "I understand th
at you could not, and cannot, think of yourself, but with my love for you I must 
do so.... Has Alpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she aske
d.  Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go or where t
o. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it not all the same?" she
 thought, and did not reply.  "You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienn
e, "that we are in dangerare surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to m
ove now. If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows..."  Pr
incess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she was talking ab
out.  "Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," she said. "Of c
ourse I would on no account wish to go away from him.... Alpatych did say somethi
ng about going.... Speak to him I can do nothing, nothing, and don't want to...."
  "I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow, but I 
think it would now be better to stay here," said Mademoiselle Bourienne. "Because
, you will agree, chere Marie, to fall into the hands of the soldiers or of rioto
us peasants would be terrible."  Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a 
proclamation not printed on ordinary Russian paper of General Rameau's, telling p
eople not to leave their homes and that the French authorities would afford them 
proper protection. She handed this to the princess.  "I think it would be best to
 appeal to that general," she continued, "and I am sure that all due respect woul
d be shown you."  Princess Mary read the paper, and her face began to quiver with
 stifled sobs.  "From whom did you get this?" she asked.  "They probably recogniz
ed that I am French, by my name," replied Mademoiselle Bourienne blushing.  Princ
ess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and with a pale face w
ent out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew's study.  "Dunyasha, sen
d Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said, "and tell Mademoiselle Bo
urienne not to come to me," she added, hearing Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "W
e must go at once, at once!" she said, appalled at the thought of being left in t
he hands of the French.  "If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the F
rench! That I, the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked General Rameau fo
r protection and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made her shudder, 
blush, and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had never experienced befor
e. All that was distressing, and especially all that was humiliating, in her posi
tion rose vividly to her mind. "They, the French, would settle in this house M. l
e General Rameau would occupy Prince Andrew's study and amuse himself by looking 
through and reading his letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the h
onors of Bogucharovo for him. I should be given a small room as a favor, the sold
iers would violate my father's newly dug grave to steal his crosses and stars, th
ey would tell me of their victories over the Russians, and would pretend to sympa
thize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary, not thinking her own thoughts but
 feeling bound to think like her father and her brother. For herself she did not 
care where she remained or what happened to her, but she felt herself the represe
ntative of her dead father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their 
thoughts and felt their feelings. What they would have said and what they would h
ave done she felt bound to say and do. She went into Prince Andrew's study, tryin
g to enter completely into his ideas, and considered her position.  The demands o
f life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father's death, all at once ro
se before her with a new, previously unknown force and took possession of her.  A
gitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michael Ivanovich and now
 for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the other maids could not say in ho
w far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement was correct. Alpatych was not at home, h
e had gone to the police. Neither could the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on b
eing sent for came in with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. With just th
e same smile of agreement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed to 
answer the old prince without expressing views of his own, he now replied to Prin
cess Mary, so that nothing definite could be got from his answers. The old valet 
Tikhon, with sunken, emaciated face that bore the stamp of inconsolable grief, re
plied "Yes, Princess" to all Princess Mary's questions and hardly refrained from 
sobbing as he looked at her.  At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room
 and with a deep bow to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.  Princess M
ary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him.  "Dronushka," she sa
id, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka who always used to bring a special 
kind of gingerbread from his visit to the fair at Vyazma every year and smilingly
 offer it to her, "Dronushka, now since our misfortune..." she began, but could n
ot go on.  "We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.  They were silent f
or a while.  "Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to tur
n to. Is it true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"  "Why shouldn't yo
u go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.  "I was told it would be dang
erous because of the enemy. Dear friend, I can do nothing. I understand nothing. 
I have nobody! I want to go away tonight or early tomorrow morning."  Dron paused
. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said "There are no horses I told Yakov A
lpatych so."  "Why are there none?" asked the princess.  "It's all God's scourge,
" said Dron. "What horses we had have been taken for the army or have diedthis is
 such a year! It's not a case of feeding horseswe may die of hunger ourselves! As
 it is, some go three days without eating. We've nothing, we've been ruined."  Pr
incess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.  "The peasants are ruined? 
They have no bread?" she asked.  "They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not 
a case of carting."  "But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to
 help them? I'll do all I can...."  To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at 
a moment when such sorrow was filling her soul, there could be rich people and po
or, and the rich could refrain from helping the poor. She had heard vaguely that 
there was such a thing as "landlord's corn" which was sometimes given to the peas
ants. She also knew that neither her father nor her brother would refuse to help 
the peasants in need, she only feared to make some mistake in speaking about the 
distribution of the grain she wished to give. She was glad such cares presented t
hemselves, enabling her without scruple to forget her own grief. She began asking
 Dron about the peasants' needs and what there was in Bogucharovo that belonged t
o the landlord.  "But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said.  "The lan
dlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Our prince did not order it to
 be sold."  "Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need I give you leav
e in my brother's name," said she.  Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.  "Give
 them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I give this order in
 my brother's name and tell them that what is ours is theirs. We do not grudge th
em anything. Tell them so."  Dron looked intently at the princess while she was s
peaking.  "Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to be take
n from me," said he. "I have served twentythree years and have done no wrong. Dis
charge me, for God's sake!"  Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of h
er or why he was asking to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted 
his devotion and that she was ready to do anything for him and for the peasants. 
     CHAPTER XI   An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had 
come, and all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order and w
ished to have word with their mistress.  "But I never told them to come," said Pr
incess Mary. "I only told Dron to let them have the grain."  "Only, for God's sak
e, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't go out to them. It's all a trick,
" said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatych returns let us get away... and please d
on't..."  "What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.  "I know it is, onl
y listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too. They say they don't agree to leave 
Bogucharovo as you ordered."  "You're making some mistake. I never ordered them t
o go away," said Princess Mary. "Call Dronushka."  Dron came and confirmed Dunyas
ha's words the peasants had come by the princess' order.  "But I never sent for t
hem," declared the princess. "You must have given my message wrong. I only said t
hat you were to give them the grain."  Dron only sighed in reply.  "If you order 
it they will go away," said he.  "No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mar
y, and in spite of the nurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porc
h Dron, Dunyasha, the nurse, and Michael Ivanovich following her.  "They probably
 think I am offering them the grain to bribe them to remain here, while I myself 
go away leaving them to the mercy of the French," thought Princess Mary. "I will 
offer them monthly rations and housing at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew wou
ld do even more in my place," she thought as she went out in the twilight toward 
the crowd standing on the pasture by the barn.  The men crowded closer together, 
stirred, and rapidly took off their hats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tri
pping over her skirt, came close up to them. So many different eyes, old and youn
g, were fixed on her, and there were so many different faces, that she could not 
distinguish any of them and, feeling that she must speak to them all at once, did
 not know how to do it. But again the sense that she represented her father and h
er brother gave her courage, and she boldly began her speech.  "I am very glad yo
u have come," she said without raising her eyes, and feeling her heart beating qu
ickly and violently. "Dronushka tells me that the war has ruined you. That is our
 common misfortune, and I shall grudge nothing to help you. I am myself going awa
y because it is dangerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am giving you
 everything, my friends, and I beg you to take everything, all our grain, so that
 you may not suffer want! And if you have been told that I am giving you the grai
n to keep you herethat is not true. On the contrary, I ask you to go with all you
r belongings to our estate near Moscow, and I promise you I will see to it that t
here you shall want for nothing. You shall be given food and lodging."  The princ
ess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.  "I am not doing this 
on my own account," she continued, "I do it in the name of my dead father, who wa
s a good master to you, and of my brother and his son."  Again she paused. No one
 broke the silence.  "Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. 
All that is mine is yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.  All ey
es were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She could not fathom whet
her it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, or apprehension and distrustbut the ex
pression on all the faces was identical.  "We are all very thankful for your boun
ty, but it won't do for us to take the landlord's grain," said a voice at the bac
k of the crowd.  "But why not?" asked the princess.  No one replied and Princess 
Mary, looking round at the crowd, found that every eye she met now was immediatel
y dropped.  "But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.  No one answere
d.  The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catch someone's ey
e.  "Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood just in front
 of her leaning on his stick. "If you think something more is wanted, tell me! I 
will do anything," said she, catching his eye.  But as if this angered him, he be
nt his head quite low and muttered  "Why should we agree? We don't want the grain
."  "Why should we give up everything? We don't agree. Don't agree.... We are sor
ry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself, alone..." came from various 
sides of the crowd.  And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expr
ession, though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude, 
but of angry resolve.  "But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary wit
h a sad smile. "Why don't you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while 
here the enemy would ruin you..."  But her voice was drowned by the voices of the
 crowd.  "We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. We don't
 agree."  Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a single eye 
in the crowd was turned to her evidently they were all trying to avoid her look. 
She felt strange and awkward.  "Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! 
Pull down your houses and go into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, inde
ed!' she says," voices in the crowd were heard saying.  With drooping head Prince
ss Mary left the crowd and went back to the house. Having repeated her order to D
ron to have horses ready for her departure next morning, she went to her room and
 remained alone with her own thoughts.      CHAPTER XII   For a long time that ni
ght Princess Mary sat by the open window of her room hearing the sound of the pea
sants' voices that reached her from the village, but it was not of them she was t
hinking. She felt that she could not understand them however much she might think
 about them. She thought only of one thing, her sorrow, which, after the break ca
used by cares for the present, seemed already to belong to the past. Now she coul
d remember it and weep or pray.  After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was
 calm and fresh. Toward midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the 
full moon began to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began
 to rise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.  Pictures of the 
near pasther father's illness and last momentsrose one after another to her memor
y. With mournful pleasure she now lingered over these images, repelling with horr
or only the last one, the picture of his death, which she felt she could not cont
emplate even in imagination at this still and mystic hour of night. And these pic
tures presented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that they seemed 
now present, now past, and now future.  She vividly recalled the moment when he h
ad his first stroke and was being dragged along by his armpits through the garden
 at Bald Hills, muttering something with his helpless tongue, twitching his gray 
eyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her.  "Even then he wanted to tell m
e what he told me the day he died," she thought. "He had always thought what he s
aid then." And she recalled in all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he h
ad the last stroke, when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home a
gainst his will. She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and going
 to the door of the conservatory where he slept that night had listened at the do
or. In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something to Tikhon, speaking of
 the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress. Evidently he had wanted to ta
lk. "And why didn't he call me? Why didn't he let me be there instead of Tikhon?"
 Princess Mary had thought and thought again now. "Now he will never tell anyone 
what he had in his soul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he 
might have said all he longed to say, and not Tikhon but I might have heard and u
nderstood him. Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought. "Perhaps he would then 
have said to me what he said the day he died. While talking to Tikhon he asked ab
out me twice. He wanted to see me, and I was standing close by, outside the door.
 It was sad and painful for him to talk to Tikhon who did not understand him. I r
emember how he began speaking to him about Lise as if she were alivehe had forgot
ten she was deadand Tikhon reminded him that she was no more, and he shouted, 'Fo
ol!' He was greatly depressed. From behind the door I heard how he lay down on hi
s bed groaning and loudly exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't I go in then? What coul
d he have done to me? What could I have lost? And perhaps he would then have been
 comforted and would have said that word to me." And Princess Mary uttered aloud 
the caressing word he had said to her on the day of his death. "Dearest!" she rep
eated, and began sobbing, with tears that relieved her soul. She now saw his face
 before her. And not the face she had known ever since she could remember and had
 always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen for the first
 time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details, when she stooped near to 
his mouth to catch what he said.  "Dearest!" she repeated again.  "What was he th
inking when he uttered that word? What is he thinking now?" This question suddenl
y presented itself to her, and in answer she saw him before her with the expressi
on that was on his face as he lay in his coffin with his chin bound up with a whi
te handkerchief. And the horror that had seized her when she touched him and conv
inced herself that that was not he, but something mysterious and horrible, seized
 her again. She tried to think of something else and to pray, but could do neithe
r. With wideopen eyes she gazed at the moonlight and the shadows, expecting every
 moment to see his dead face, and she felt that the silence brooding over the hou
se and within it held her fast.  "Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screa
med wildly, and tearing herself out of this silence she ran to the servants' quar
ters to meet her old nurse and the maidservants who came running toward her.     
 CHAPTER XIII   On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lav
rushka who had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, left their 
quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo, and went for a rideto try a new 
horse Ilyin had bought and to find out whether there was any hay to be had in the
 villages.  For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostile 
armies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it as for the 
French vanguard Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wished to take such prov
isions as remained at Bogucharovo before the French could get them.  Rostov and I
lyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way to Bogucharovo, a princely estate 
with a dwelling house and farm where they hoped to find many domestic serfs and p
retty girls, they questioned Lavrushka about Napoleon and laughed at his stories,
 and raced one another to try Ilyin's horse.  Rostov had no idea that the village
 he was entering was the property of that very Bolkonski who had been engaged to 
his sister.  Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along the
 incline before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, was the fir
st to gallop into the village street.  "You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed.  "Ye
s, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov, stroking his he
ated Donets horse.  "And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavru
shka from behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish to morti
fy you."  They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants wa
s standing.  Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivals
 without doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled faces and scanty
 beards emerged from the tavern, smiling, staggering, and singing some incoherent
 song, and approached the officers.  "Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is th
ere any hay here?"  "And how like one another," said Ilyin.  "A moost merry coomp
a...!" sang one of the peasants with a blissful smile.  One of the men came out o
f the crowd and went up to Rostov.  "Who do you belong to?" he asked.  "The Frenc
h," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleon himself"and he pointed to Lavr
ushka.  "Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.  "And is there a large 
force of you here?" said another, a short man, coming up.  "Very large," answered
 Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" he added. "Is it a holiday?"  "The ol
d men have met to talk over the business of the commune," replied the peasant, mo
ving away.  At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and
 a man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.  "The one in pink is 
mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeing Dunyasha running resolutely toward him. 
 "She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking.  "What do you want, my prett
y?" said Ilyin with a smile.  "The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and y
our name."  "This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humble serva
nt."  "Cooompany!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as he looked at
 Ilyin talking to the girl. Following Dunyasha, Alpatych advanced to Rostov, havi
ng bared his head while still at a distance.  "May I make bold to trouble your ho
nor?" said he respectfully, but with a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of 
this officer and with a hand thrust into his bosom. "My mistress, daughter of Gen
eral in Chief Prince Nicholas Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month, 
finding herself in difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people"he point
ed to the peasants"asks you to come up to the house.... Won't you, please, ride o
n a little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholy smile, "as it is not conveni
ent in the presence of...?" He pointed to the two peasants who kept as close to h
im as horseflies to a horse.  "Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... Grand! Fo
rgive us for Christ's sake, eh?" said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him.  Ros
tov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.  "Or perhaps they amuse your honor?"
 remarked Alpatych with a staid air, as he pointed at the old men with his free h
and.  "No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on a lit
tle way. "What's the matter?" he asked.  "I make bold to inform your honor that t
he rude peasants here don't wish to let the mistress leave the estate, and threat
en to unharness her horses, so that though everything has been packed up since mo
rning, her excellency cannot get away."  "Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.  "I have
 the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.  Rostov dismounted,
 gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpatych to the house, questioning h
im as to the state of affairs. It appeared that the princess' offer of corn to th
e peasants the previous day, and her talk with Dron and at the meeting, had actua
lly had so bad an effect that Dron had finally given up the keys and joined the p
easants and had not appeared when Alpatych sent for him and that in the morning w
hen the princess gave orders to harness for her journey, the peasants had come in
 a large crowd to the barn and sent word that they would not let her leave the vi
llage that there was an order not to move, and that they would unharness the hors
es. Alpatych had gone out to admonish them, but was told it was chiefly Karp who 
did the talking, Dron not showing himself in the crowd that they could not let th
e princess go, that there was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed th
ey would serve her as before and obey her in everything.  At the moment when Rost
ov and Ilyin were galloping along the road, Princess Mary, despite the dissuasion
s of Alpatych, her nurse, and the maids, had given orders to harness and intended
 to start, but when the cavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the
 coachman ran away, and the women in the house began to wail.  "Father! Benefacto
r! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices as Rostov passed through the 
anteroom.  Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sitting
 room, when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he was and why he had co
me, or what was happening to her. When she saw his Russian face, and by his walk 
and the first words he uttered recognized him as a man of her own class, she glan
ced at him with her deep radiant look and began speaking in a voice that faltered
 and trembled with emotion. This meeting immediately struck Rostov as a romantic 
event. "A helpless girl overwhelmed with grief, left to the mercy of coarse, riot
ing peasants! And what a strange fate sent me here! What gentleness and nobility 
there are in her features and expression!" thought he as he looked at her and lis
tened to her timid story.  When she began to tell him that all this had happened 
the day after her father's funeral, her voiced trembled. She turned away, and the
n, as if fearing he might take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked at 
him with an apprehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostov's eyes. Pr
incess Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with that radiant look whi
ch caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten.  "I cannot express, Princess
, how glad I am that I happened to ride here and am able to show my readiness to 
serve you," said Rostov, rising. "Go when you please, and I give you my word of h
onor that no one shall dare to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to a
ct as your escort." And bowing respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he m
oved toward the door.  Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though h
e would consider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish to take
 advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.  Princess Mary understood this
 and appreciated his delicacy.  "I am very, very grateful to you," she said in Fr
ench, "but I hope it was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for i
t." She suddenly began to cry.  "Excuse me!" she said.  Rostov, knitting his brow
s, left the room with another low bow.      CHAPTER XIV   "Well, is she pretty? A
h, friendmy pink one is delicious her name is Dunyasha...."  But on glancing at R
ostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that his hero and commander was followin
g quite a different train of thought.  Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and withou
t replying strode off with rapid steps to the village.  "I'll show them I'll give
 it to them, the brigands!" said he to himself.  Alpatych at a gliding trot, only
 just managing not to run, kept up with him with difficulty.  "What decision have
 you been pleased to come to?" said he.  Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists,
 suddenly and sternly turned on Alpatych.  "Decision? What decision? Old dotard!.
.." cried he. "What have you been about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you ca
n't manage them? You're a traitor yourself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!.
.." And as if afraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and went rap
idly forward. Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings, kept pace with Rostov at
 a gliding gait and continued to impart his views. He said the peasants were obdu
rate and that at the present moment it would be imprudent to "overresist" them wi
thout an armed force, and would it not be better first to send for the military? 
 "I'll give them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostov meaningle
ssly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need to vent it.  Without co
nsidering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick, resolute steps towar
d the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the more Alpatych felt that this unreas
onable action might produce good results. The peasants in the crowd were similarl
y impressed when they saw Rostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
  After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see the prince
ss, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd. Some of the pe
asants said that these new arrivals were Russians and might take it amiss that th
e mistress was being detained. Dron was of this opinion, but as soon as he expres
sed it Karp and others attacked their exElder.  "How many years have you been fat
tening on the commune?" Karp shouted at him. "It's all one to you! You'll dig up 
your pot of money and take it away with you.... What does it matter to you whethe
r our homes are ruined or not?"  "We've been told to keep order, and that no one 
is to leave their homes or take away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cr
ied another.  "It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudg
ed your lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began attacking Dron"and so the
y took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all have to die."  "To be sure
, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune," said Dron.  "That's itnot aga
inst it! You've filled your belly...."  The two tall peasants had their say. As s
oon as Rostov, followed by Ilyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, 
Karp, thrusting his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the fro
nt. Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closer together. 
 "Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the crowd with quick
 steps.  "The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.  But before the w
ords were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and a fierce blow jerked his he
ad to one side.  "Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where
's the Elder?" he cried furiously.  "The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Za
kharych, you!" meek and flustered voices here and there were heard calling and ca
ps began to come off their heads.  "We don't riot, we're following the orders," d
eclared Karp, and at that moment several voices began speaking together.  "It's a
s the old men have decidedthere's too many of you giving orders."  "Arguing? Muti
ny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly in a voice not his own, grip
ping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind him!" he shouted, though there was no on
e to bind him but Lavrushka and Alpatych.  Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and
 seized him by the arms from behind.  "Shall I call up our men from beyond the hi
ll?" he called out.  Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by n
ame to come and bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and began tak
ing off their belts.  "Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.  With
 a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd.  "Are you the Elder? Bin
d him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if that order, too, could not possibly meet
 with any opposition.  And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took
 off his own belt and handed it to them, as if to aid them.  "And you all listen 
to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be off to your houses at once, and don't le
t one of your voices be heard!"  "Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just ou
t of foolishness. It's all nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voi
ces were heard bickering with one another.  "There! What did I say?" said Alpatyc
h, coming into his own again. "It's wrong, lads!"   "All our stupidity, Yakov Alp
atych," came the answers, and the crowd began at once to disperse through the vil
lage.  The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two drunken peas
ants followed them.  "Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.  "Ho
w can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinking of, you fool?" ad
ded the other"A real fool!"  Two hours later the carts were standing in the court
yard of the Bogucharovo house. The peasants were briskly carrying out the proprie
tor's goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated at Princess Mary's
 wish from the cupboard where he had been confined, was standing in the yard dire
cting the men.  "Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man 
with a round smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You know it has cos
t money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cord where it'll
 get rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things. Let it all be done properly, 
according to rule. Look here, put it under the bast matting and cover it with hay
that's the way!"  "Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince A
ndrew's library cupboards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy, ladssolid book
s."  "Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall, roundfaced pe
asant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at the dictionaries that were on 
the top.   Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go back t
o the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure. When her carriage
 drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eight miles from Boguchar
ovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. At the inn at Yankovo he respec
tfully took leave of her, for the first time permitting himself to kiss her hand.
  "How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary's expressions of
 gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what had occurred. "Any police offi
cer would have done as much! If we had had only peasants to fight, we should not 
have let the enemy come so far," said he with a sense of shame and wishing to cha
nge the subject. "I am only happy to have had the opportunity of making your acqu
aintance. Goodby, Princess. I wish you happiness and consolation and hope to meet
 you again in happier circumstances. If you don't want to make me blush, please d
on't thank me!"  But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thank
ed him with the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude and tenderne
ss. She could not believe that there was nothing to thank him for. On the contrar
y, it seemed to her certain that had he not been there she would have perished at
 the hands of the mutineers and of the French, and that he had exposed himself to
 terrible and obvious danger to save her, and even more certain was it that he wa
s a man of lofty and noble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow. 
His kind, honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun t
o cry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.  When she had taken lea
ve of him and remained alone she suddenly felt her eyes filling with tears, and t
hen not for the first time the strange question presented itself to her did she l
ove him?  On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' position was not
 a cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage, more than once noti
ced that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled at something with an ex
pression of mingled joy and sorrow.  "Well, supposing I do love him?" thought Pri
ncess Mary.  Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen i
n love with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herself with th
e thought that no one would ever know it and that she would not be to blame if, w
ithout ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued to the end of her life to lov
e the man with whom she had fallen in love for the first and last time in her lif
e.  Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words, happiness
 did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments that Dunyasha noticed 
her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window.  "Was it not fate that brou
ght him to Bogucharovo, and at that very moment?" thought Princess Mary. "And tha
t caused his sister to refuse my brother?" And in all this Princess Mary saw the 
hand of Providence.  The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreea
ble one. To remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of his
 adventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay and having 
picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grew angry. It made him a
ngry just because the idea of marrying the gentle Princess Mary, who was attracti
ve to him and had an enormous fortune, had against his will more than once entere
d his head. For himself personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife by m
arrying her he would make the countess his mother happy, would be able to put his
 father's affairs in order, and would evenhe felt itensure Princess Mary's happin
ess.  But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angry when he wa
s rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.      CHAPTER XV   On receiving command of t
he armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew and sent an order for him to report at
 headquarters.  Prince Andrew arrived at TsarevoZaymishche on the very day and at
 the very hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first time. He stopp
ed in the village at the priest's house in front of which stood the commander in 
chief's carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gate awaiting his Serene Hi
ghness, as everyone now called Kutuzov. From the field beyond the village came no
w sounds of regimental music and now the roar of many voices shouting "Hurrah!" t
o the new commander in chief. Two orderlies, a courier and a majordomo, stood nea
r by, some ten paces from Prince Andrew, availing themselves of Kutuzov's absence
 and of the fine weather. A short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thi
ck mustaches and whiskers rode up to the gate and, glancing at Prince Andrew, inq
uired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there and whether he would soon 
be back.  Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness' staff but
 was himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a smart orderly, who
, with the peculiar contempt with which a commander in chief's orderly speaks to 
officers, replied  "What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What 
do you want?"  The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at t
he orderly's tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, and approache
d Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him on the bench and the l
ieutenant colonel sat down beside him.  "You're also waiting for the commander in
 chief?" said he. "They say he weceives evewyone, thank God!... It's awful with t
hose sausage eaters! Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now
 p'waps Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what was happeni
ng. We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in the campaign?" he ask
ed.  "I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking part in the
 retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dearnot to mention the estate a
nd home of my birthmy father, who died of grief. I belong to the province of Smol
ensk."  "Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I'm Li
eutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov, pressing Prince
 Andrew's hand and looking into his face with a particularly kindly attention. "Y
es, I heard," said he sympathetically, and after a short pause added "Yes, it's S
cythian warfare. It's all vewy wellonly not for those who get it in the neck. So 
you are Pwince Andwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to m
ake your acquaintance!" he repeated again, smiling sadly, and he again pressed Pr
ince Andrew's hand.  Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of
 her first suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painfu
l feelings of which he had not thought lately, but which still found place in his
 soul. Of late he had received so many new and very serious impressionssuch as th
e retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills, and the recent news of his fath
er's deathand had experienced so many emotions, that for a long time past those m
emories had not entered his mind, and now that they did, they did not act on him 
with nearly their former strength. For Denisov, too, the memories awakened by the
 name of Bolkonski belonged to a distant, romantic past, when after supper and af
ter Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteen without realizi
ng what he was doing. He smiled at the recollection of that time and of his love 
for Natasha, and passed at once to what now interested him passionately and exclu
sively. This was a plan of campaign he had devised while serving at the outposts 
during the retreat. He had proposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished 
to propose it to Kutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line of 
operation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, or concurrently with
, action on the front to bar the advance of the French, we should attack their li
ne of communication. He began explaining his plan to Prince Andrew.  "They can't 
hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake to bweak thwough. Give me f
ive hundwed men and I will bweak the line, that's certain! There's only one waygu
ewilla warfare!"  Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan t
o Bolkonski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from the army, gro
wing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music and songs and coming 
from the field where the review was held. Sounds of hoofs and shouts were nearing
 the village.  "He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate
.  Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers a guard o
f honor was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down the street mounted on a ra
ther small sorrel horse. A huge suite of generals rode behind him. Barclay was ri
ding almost beside him, and a crowd of officers ran after and around them shoutin
g, "Hurrah!"  His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was impati
ently urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and he raised 
his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with a red band and no peak, nodding his 
head continually. When he came up to the guard of honor, a fine set of Grenadiers
 mostly wearing decorations, who were giving him the salute, he looked at them si
lently and attentively for nearly a minute with the steady gaze of a commander an
d then turned to the crowd of generals and officers surrounding him. Suddenly his
 face assumed a subtle expression, he shrugged his shoulders with an air of perpl
exity.  "And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, goodby, General
," he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and Denisov.  "Hurrah! hur
rah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.  Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Ku
tuzov had grown still more corpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball,
 the scar, and the familiar weariness of his expression were still the same. He w
as wearing the white Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hangin
g over his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply on his bris
k little horse.  "Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into
 the yard. His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who mean
s to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrup and, lurchin
g with his whole body and puckering his face with the effort, raised it with diff
iculty onto the saddle, leaned on his knee, groaned, and slipped down into the ar
ms of the Cossacks and adjutants who stood ready to assist him.  He pulled himsel
f together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glanced at Prince Andrew, and, ev
idently not recognizing him, moved with his waddling gait to the porch. "Whew... 
whew... whew!" he whistled, and again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs w
ith old men, it was only after some seconds that the impression produced by Princ
e Andrew's face linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality.  
"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Come along..." sa
id he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto the porch which creaked under 
his weight.  He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.  "And h
ow's your father?"  "I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince And
rew abruptly.  Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then too
k off his cap and crossed himself  "May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will 
be done to us all!" He sighed deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for
 a while. "I loved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all my hea
rt."  He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for some tim
e did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw that Kutuzov's flabb
y lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes. He sighed and pressed on t
he bench with both hands to raise himself.  "Come! Come with me, we'll have a tal
k," said he.  But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors th
an by the enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despite the 
angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, his hands still p
ressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly. Denisov, having given his name, announ
ced that he had to communicate to his Serene Highness a matter of great importanc
e for their country's welfare. Kutuzov looked wearily at him and, lifting his han
ds with a gesture of annoyance, folded them across his stomach, repeating the wor
ds "For our country's welfare? Well, what is it? Speak!" Denisov blushed like a g
irl it was strange to see the color rise in that shaggy, bibulous, timeworn face 
and boldly began to expound his plan of cutting the enemy's lines of communicatio
n between Smolensk and Vyazma. Denisov came from those parts and knew the country
 well. His plan seemed decidedly a good one, especially from the strength of conv
iction with which he spoke. Kutuzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally gla
ncing at the door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to em
erge from it. And from that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a por
tfolio under his arm really did appear.  "What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of De
nisov's explanations, "are you ready so soon?"  "Ready, your Serene Highness," re
plied the general.  Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say "How is one man to
 deal with it all?" and again listened to Denisov.  "I give my word of honor as a
 Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that I can bweak Napoleon's line of communicati
on!"  "What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov?" aske
d Kutuzov, interrupting him.  "He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness."  "Ah, we we
re friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, all right, friend, stay here at
 the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."  With a nod to Denisov he turned away
 and put out his hand for the papers Konovnitsyn had brought him.  "Would not you
r Serene Highness like to come inside?" said the general on duty in a discontente
d voice, "the plans must be examined and several papers have to be signed."  An a
djutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness within. But Kutuz
ov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he was disengaged. He made a gr
imace...  "No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I'll look 
at them here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to Prince Andrew, who 
remained in the porch and listened to the general's report.  While this was being
 given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman's voice and the rustle of a si
lk dress behind the door. Several times on glancing that way he noticed behind th
at door a plump, rosy, handsome woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief 
on her head, holding a dish and evidently awaiting the entrance of the commander 
in chief. Kutuzov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of
 the priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his Serene Highness
 bread and salt. "Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at 
the church, and she intends to welcome him in the house.... She's very pretty," a
dded the adjutant with a smile. At those words Kutuzov looked round. He was liste
ning to the general's reportwhich consisted chiefly of a criticism of the positio
n at TsarevoZaymishcheas he had listened to Denisov, and seven years previously h
ad listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of war. He evidently list
ened only because he had ears which, though there was a piece of tow in one of th
em, could not help hearing but it was evident that nothing the general could say 
would surprise or even interest him, that he knew all that would be said beforeha
nd, and heard it all only because he had to, as one has to listen to the chanting
 of a service of prayer. All that Denisov had said was clever and to the point. W
hat the general was saying was even more clever and to the point, but it was evid
ent that Kutuzov despised knowledge and cleverness, and knew of something else th
at would decide the mattersomething independent of cleverness and knowledge. Prin
ce Andrew watched the commander in chief's face attentively, and the only express
ion he could see there was one of boredom, curiosity as to the meaning of the fem
inine whispering behind the door, and a desire to observe propriety. It was evide
nt that Kutuzov despised cleverness and learning and even the patriotic feeling s
hown by Denisov, but despised them not because of his own intellect, feelings, or
 knowledgehe did not try to display any of thesebut because of something else. He
 despised them because of his old age and experience of life. The only instructio
n Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report referred to looting by the Ru
ssian troops. At the end of the report the general put before him for signature a
 paper relating to the recovery of payment from army commanders for green oats mo
wn down by the soldiers, when landowners lodged petitions for compensation.  Afte
r hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook his head.  "Int
o the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, my dear fellow," s
aid he, "into the fire with all such things! Let them cut the crops and burn wood
 to their hearts' content. I don't order it or allow it, but I don't exact compen
sation either. One can't get on without it. 'When wood is chopped the chips will 
fly.'" He looked at the paper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he muttered, sh
aking his head.      CHAPTER XVI   "Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed 
the last of the documents, and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his 
fat white neck he moved toward the door with a more cheerful expression.  The pri
est's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had after all not managed t
o present at the right moment, though she had so long been preparing for it, and 
with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.  He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her
 chin with his hand, and said  "Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"  He to
ok some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on the dish for her. "We
ll, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked, moving to the door of the room
 assigned to him. The priest's wife smiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks f
ollowed him into the room. The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince An
drew to lunch with him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutu
zov. He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the same unbuttoned overcoat
. He had in his hand a French book which he closed as Prince Andrew entered, mark
ing the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw by the cover that it was Les Cheval
iers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.  "Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a 
talk," said Kutuzov. "It's sad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am
 a father to you, a second father...."  Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of
 his father's death, and what he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it
.  "What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in an agitated 
voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Prince Andrew's story the cond
ition Russia was in. "But give me time, give me time!" he said with a grim look, 
evidently not wishing to continue this agitating conversation, and added "I sent 
for you to keep you with me."  "I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no 
longer fit for the staff," replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov notic
ed.  Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.  "But above all," added Prince Andrew, "
I have grown used to my regiment, am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men al
so like me. I should be sorry to leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of be
ing with you, believe me..."  A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression li
t up Kutuzov's podgy face. He cut Bolkonski short.  "I am sorry, for I need you. 
But you're right, you're right! It's not here that men are needed. Advisers are a
lways plentiful, but men are not. The regiments would not be what they are if the
 wouldbe advisers served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I reme
mber, yes, I remember you with the standard!" said Kutuzov, and a flush of pleasu
re suffused Prince Andrew's face at this recollection.  Taking his hand and drawi
ng him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek to be kissed, and again Prince Andrew
 noticed tears in the old man's eyes. Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's te
ars came easily, and that he was particularly tender to and considerate of him fr
om a wish to show sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was bot
h pleasant and flattering to him.  "Go your way and God be with you. I know your 
path is the path of honor!" He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed s
omeone to send." And changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkish 
war and the peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been much blamed," he sai
d, "both for that war and the peace... but everything came at the right time. Tou
t vient a point a celui qui sait attendre. * And there were as many advisers ther
e as here..." he went on, returning to the subject of "advisers" which evidently 
occupied him. "Ah, those advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we s
hould not have made peace with Turkey and should not have been through with that 
war. Everything in haste, but more haste, less speed. Kamenski would have been lo
st if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty thousand men. It is not 
difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult to win a campaign. For that, 
not storming and attacking but patience and time are wanted. Kamenski sent soldie
rs to Rustchuk, but I only employed these two things and took more fortresses tha
n Kamenski and made them Turks eat horseflesh!" He swayed his head. "And the Fren
ch shall too, believe me," he went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'l
l make them eat horseflesh!" And tears again dimmed his eyes.       * "Everything
 comes in time to him who knows how to wait."   "But shan't we have to accept bat
tle?" remarked Prince Andrew.  "We shall if everybody wants it it can't be helped
.... But believe me, my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two patien
ce and time, they will do it all. But the advisers n'entendent pas de cette oreil
le, voila le mal. * Some want a thingothers don't. What's one to do?" he asked, e
vidently expecting an answer. "Well, what do you want us to do?" he repeated and 
his eye shone with a deep, shrewd look. "I'll tell you what to do," he continued,
 as Prince Andrew still did not reply "I will tell you what to do, and what I do.
 Dans le doute, mon cher," he paused, "abstienstoi" *2he articulated the French p
roverb deliberately.        * "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."       
* 2 "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing."   "Well, goodby, my dear fellow 
remember that with all my heart I share your sorrow, and that for you I am not a 
Serene Highness, nor a prince, nor a commander in chief, but a father! If you wan
t anything come straight to me. Goodby, my dear boy."  Again he embraced and kiss
ed Prince Andrew, but before the latter had left the room Kutuzov gave a sigh of 
relief and went on with his unfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame d
e Genlis.  Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after th
at interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to the genera
l course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had been entrusted. The more he 
realized the absence of all personal motive in that old manin whom there seemed t
o remain only the habit of passions, and in place of an intellect grouping events
 and drawing conclusions only the capacity calmly to contemplate the course of ev
entsthe more reassured he was that everything would be as it should. "He will not
 bring in any plan of his own. He will not devise or undertake anything," thought
 Prince Andrew, "but he will hear everything, remember everything, and put everyt
hing in its place. He will not hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful.
 He understands that there is something stronger and more important than his own 
willthe inevitable course of events, and he can see them and grasp their signific
ance, and seeing that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his per
sonal wish directed to something else. And above all," thought Prince Andrew, "on
e believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel by Genlis and the Frenc
h proverbs, and because his voice shook when he said 'What they have brought us t
o!' and had a sob in it when he said he would 'make them eat horseflesh!'"  On su
ch feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity and general approval
 were founded with which, despite court influences, the popular choice of Kutuzov
 as commander in chief was received.      CHAPTER XVII   After the Emperor had le
ft Moscow, life flowed on there in its usual course, and its course was so very u
sual that it was difficult to remember the recent days of patriotic elation and a
rdor, hard to believe that Russia was really in danger and that the members of th
e English Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything for
 it. The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had displayed duri
ng the Emperor's stay was the call for contributions of men and money, a necessit
y that as soon as the promises had been made assumed a legal, official form and b
ecame unavoidable.  With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of 
their situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even more fr
ivolous, as always happens with people who see a great danger approaching. At the
 approach of danger there are always two voices that speak with equal power in th
e human soul one very reasonably tells a man to consider the nature of the danger
 and the means of escaping it the other, still more reasonably, says that it is t
oo depressing and painful to think of the danger, since it is not in man's power 
to foresee everything and avert the general course of events, and it is therefore
 better to disregard what is painful till it comes, and to think about what is pl
easant. In solitude a man generally listens to the first voice, but in society to
 the second. So it was now with the inhabitants of Moscow. It was long since peop
le had been as gay in Moscow as that year.  Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by w
oodcuts of a drink shop, a potman, and a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin
, "whohaving been a militiaman and having had rather too much at the pubheard tha
t Napoleon wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in very bad la
nguage, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of the eagle, began to ad
dress the assembled people," were read and discussed, together with the latest of
 Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.  In the corner room at the Club, members g
athered to read these broadsheets, and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the
 French, saying "They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with our buckwhea
t porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup. They are all dwarfs and one p
easant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork." Others did not like that to
ne and said it was stupid and vulgar. It was said that Rostopchin had expelled al
l Frenchmen and even all foreigners from Moscow, and that there had been some spi
es and agents of Napoleon among them but this was told chiefly to introduce Rosto
pchin's witty remark on that occasion. The foreigners were deported to Nizhni by 
boat, and Rostopchin had said to them in French "Rentrez en vousmemes entrez dans
 la barque, et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon." * There was talk of all the
 government offices having been already removed from Moscow, and to this Shinshin
's witticism was addedthat for that alone Moscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon
. It was said that Mamonov's regiment would cost him eight hundred thousand ruble
s, and that Bezukhov had spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Be
zukhov's action was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the he
ad of his regiment without charging anything for the show.        * "Think it ove
r get into the barque, and take care not to      make it a barque of Charon."   "
You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected and pressed toge
ther a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringed fingers.  Julie was preparin
g to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewell soiree.  "Bezukhov est ridic
ule, but he is so kind and goodnatured. What pleasure is there to be so caustique
?"  "A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called "mon chev
alier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.  In Julie's set, as in many other c
ircles in Moscow, it had been agreed that they would speak nothing but Russian an
d that those who made a slip and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee o
f Voluntary Contributions.  "Another forfeit for a Gallicism," said a Russian wri
ter who was present. "'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"  "You spare
 no one," continued Julie to the young man without heeding the author's remark.  
"For caustiqueI am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay again for the pl
easure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms I won't be responsible," she rema
rked, turning to the author "I have neither the money nor the time, like Prince G
alitsyn, to engage a master to teach me Russian!"  "Ah, here he is!" she added. "
Quand on... No, no," she said to the militia officer, "you won't catch me. Speak 
of the sun and you see its rays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just
 talking of you," she said with the facility in lying natural to a society woman.
 "We were saying that your regiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's."  
"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing his hostess' hand 
and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."  "You will, of course, comman
d it yourself?" said Julie, directing a sly, sarcastic glance toward the militia 
officer.  The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his face 
expressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. In spite of his absentm
indedness and good nature, Pierre's personality immediately checked any attempt t
o ridicule him to his face.  "No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big
, stout body. "I should make too good a target for the French, besides I am afrai
d I should hardly be able to climb onto a horse."  Among those whom Julie's guest
s happened to choose to gossip about were the Rostovs.  "I hear that their affair
s are in a very bad way," said Julie. "And he is so unreasonable, the count himse
lf I mean. The Razumovskis wanted to buy his house and his estate near Moscow, bu
t it drags on and on. He asks too much."  "No, I think the sale will come off in 
a few days," said someone. "Though it is madness to buy anything in Moscow now." 
 "Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"  "Then why are you le
aving?"  "I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone is goi
ng and besidesI am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."  "Well, of course, of course! L
et me have some more strips of linen."  "If he manages the business properly he w
ill be able to pay off all his debts," said the militia officer, speaking of Rost
ov.  "A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so long in Mos
cow? They meant to leave for the country long ago. Natalie is quite well again no
w, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile.  "They are waiting for th
eir younger son," Pierre replied. "He joined Obolenski's Cossacks and went to Bel
aya Tserkov where the regiment is being formed. But now they have had him transfe
rred to my regiment and are expecting him every day. The count wanted to leave lo
ng ago, but the countess won't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns."
  "I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie has recovered h
er looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily some people get over everyt
hing!"  "Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.  Julie smiled.  "Yo
u know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame de Souza's novels."  
"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.  "Oh, come, my dear 
count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire, ma parole d'honneur!" *    
   * "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"   "Forfeit, forfeit!"
 cried the militia officer.  "All right, one can't talkhow tiresome!"  "What is '
the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, rising to his feet.  "Come now, C
ount, you know!"  "I don't know anything about it," said Pierre.  "I know you wer
e friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always more friendly with Verathat d
ear Vera."  "No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have not 
taken on myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, and have not been to
 their house for nearly a month. But I cannot understand the cruelty..."  "Qui s'
excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smiling and waving the lint triumphantly, and to 
have the last word she promptly changed the subject. "Do you know what I heard to
day? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrived in Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has 
lost her father?"       * "Who excuses himself, accuses himself."   "Really? Wher
e is she? I should like very much to see her," said Pierre.  "I spent the evening
 with her yesterday. She is going to their estate near Moscow either today or tom
orrow morning, with her nephew."  "Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre.  "She is 
well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite a romance. Nicholas R
ostov! She was surrounded, and they wanted to kill her and had wounded some of he
r people. He rushed in and saved her...."  "Another romance," said the militia of
ficer. "Really, this general flight has been arranged to get all the old maids ma
rried off. Catiche is one and Princess Bolkonskaya another."  "Do you know, I rea
lly believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeune homme." *       * "A little bi
t in love with the young man."   "Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"  "But how could one
 say that in Russian?"      CHAPTER XVIII   When Pierre returned home he was hand
ed two of Rostopchin's broadsheets that had been brought that day.  The first dec
lared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbidden people to leave Moscow 
was false on the contrary he was glad that ladies and tradesmen's wives were leav
ing the city. "There will be less panic and less gossip," ran the broadsheet "but
 I will stake my life on it that scoundrel will not enter Moscow." These words sh
owed Pierre clearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow. The se
cond broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at Vyazma, that Count Wittgenst
ein had defeated the French, but that as many of the inhabitants of Moscow wished
 to be armed, weapons were ready for them at the arsenal sabers, pistols, and mus
kets which could be had at a low price. The tone of the proclamation was not as j
ocose as in the former Chigirin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets. Ev
idently the terrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his sou
l but which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near.  "Shall I joi
n the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himself for the hundredth ti
me. He took a pack of cards that lay on the table and began to lay them out for a
 game of patience.  "If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shuffl
ing the cards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes out, 
it means... what does it mean?"  He had not decided what it should mean when he h
eard the voice of the eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come i
n.  "Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre to himself. "Come
 in, come in!" he added to the princess.  Only the eldest princess, the one with 
the stony face and long waist, was still living in Pierre's house. The two younge
r ones had both married.  "Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said in a reproa
chful and agitated voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is going 
to happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How is it that we
 are staying on?"  "On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said 
Pierre in the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feeling unc
omfortable in the role of her benefactor.  "Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfacto
ry! Barbara Ivanovna told me today how our troops are distinguishing themselves. 
It certainly does them credit! And the people too are quite mutinousthey no longe
r obey, even my maid has taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon begin b
eating us. One can't walk in the streets. But, above all, the French will be here
 any day now, so what are we waiting for? I ask just one thing of you, cousin," s
he went on, "arrange for me to be taken to Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't
 live under Bonaparte's rule."  "Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your info
rmation from? On the contrary..."  "I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may i
f they please.... If you don't want to do this..."  "But I will, I'll give the or
der at once."  The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry
 with. Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.  "But you have been misinfo
rmed," said Pierre. "Everything is quiet in the city and there is not the slighte
st danger. See! I've just been reading..." He showed her the broadsheet. "Count R
ostopchin writes that he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter 
Moscow."  "Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is a hyp
ocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't he write in th
ose idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it might be, should be dragged to t
he lockup by his hair'? How silly! 'And honor and glory to whoever captures him,'
 he says. This is what his cajolery has brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna told me t
he mob near killed her because she said something in French."  "Oh, but it's so..
. You take everything so to heart," said Pierre, and began laying out his cards f
or patience.  Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army, 
but remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation, irresolution
, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expecting something terrible.  Next da
y toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head steward came to inform h
im that the money needed for the equipment of his regiment could not be found wit
hout selling one of the estates. In general the head steward made out to Pierre t
hat his project of raising a regiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to him, sca
rcely able to repress a smile.  "Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done
? I can't draw back now!"  The worse everything became, especially his own affair
s, the better was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe
 he expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Julie had g
one, and so had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only the Rostovs remained,
 but he did not go to see them.  To distract his thoughts he drove that day to th
e village of Vorontsovo to see the great balloon Leppich was constructing to dest
roy the foe, and a trial balloon that was to go up next day. The balloon was not 
yet ready, but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor's desi
re. The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchin as follows   As soon as Leppich i
s ready, get together a crew of reliable and intelligent men for his car and send
 a courier to General Kutuzov to let him know. I have informed him of the matter.
  Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for the first 
time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy's hands. It is essen
tial for him to combine his movements with those of the commander in chief.   On 
his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe Place Pierre, seeing
 a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and got out of his trap. A French 
cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. The flogging was only just over, a
nd the executioner was releasing from the flogging bench a stout man with red whi
skers, in blue stockings and a green jacket, who was moaning piteously. Another c
riminal, thin and pale, stood near. Judging by their faces they were both Frenchm
en. With a frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman's 
face, Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd.  "What is it? Who is it? What i
s it for?" he kept asking.  But the attention of the crowdofficials, burghers, sh
opkeepers, peasants, and women in cloaks and in pelisseswas so eagerly centered o
n what was passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. The stout man rose, 
frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying to appear firm began to pul
l on his jacket without looking about him, but suddenly his lips trembled and he 
began to cry, in the way fullblooded grownup men cry, though angry with himself f
or doing so. In the crowd people began talking loudly, to stifle their feelings o
f pity as it seemed to Pierre.  "He's cook to some prince."  "Eh, mounseer, Russi
an sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets his teeth on edge!" said a wrink
led clerk who was standing behind Pierre, when the Frenchman began to cry.  The c
lerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would be appreciated. Some peo
ple began to laugh, others continued to watch in dismay the executioner who was u
ndressing the other man.  Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily
 away, went back to his trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took 
his seat. As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times so audibly
 that the coachman asked him  "What is your pleasure?"  "Where are you going?" sh
outed Pierre to the man, who was driving to Lubyanka Street.  "To the Governor's,
 as you ordered," answered the coachman.  "Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing 
his coachmana thing he rarely did. "Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead
!" "I must get away this very day," he murmured to himself.  At the sight of the 
tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding the Lobnoe Place, Pierre had so defi
nitely made up his mind that he could no longer remain in Moscow and would leave 
for the army that very day that it seemed to him that either he had told the coac
hman this or that the man ought to have known it for himself.  On reaching home P
ierre gave orders to Evstafeyhis head coachman who knew everything, could do anyt
hing, and was known to all Moscowthat he would leave that night for the army at M
ozhaysk, and that his saddle horses should be sent there. This could not all be a
rranged that day, so on Evstafey's representation Pierre had to put off his depar
ture till next day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance.  
On the twentyfourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, and after dinne
r Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night in Perkhushkovo, he learned
 that there had been a great battle that evening. This was the battle of Shevardi
no. He was told that there in Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing, bu
t nobody could answer his questions as to who had won. At dawn next day Pierre wa
s approaching Mozhaysk.  Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, an
d at the hostel where Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room 
to be had. It was full of officers.  Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops
 were stationed or on the march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caiss
ons, and cannon were everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and t
he farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea of troop
s the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new and joyful feeling he 
had not experienced before. It was a feeling akin to what he had felt at the Slob
oda Palace during the Emperor's visita sense of the necessity of undertaking some
thing and sacrificing something. He now experienced a glad consciousness that eve
rything that constitutes men's happinessthe comforts of life, wealth, even life i
tselfis rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared with something... With wha
t? Pierre could not say, and he did not try to determine for whom and for what he
 felt such particular delight in sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with
 the question of what to sacrifice for the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded
 him a new and joyous sensation.      CHAPTER XIX   On the twentyfourth of August
 the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt was fought, on the twentyfifth not a shot w
as fired by either side, and on the twentysixth the battle of Borodino itself too
k place.  Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given and accep
ted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the least sense in it f
or either the French or the Russians. Its immediate result for the Russians was, 
and was bound to be, that we were brought nearer to the destruction of Moscowwhic
h we feared more than anything in the world and for the French its immediate resu
lt was that they were brought nearer to the destruction of their whole armywhich 
they feared more than anything in the world. What the result must be was quite ob
vious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.  If the command
ers had been guided by reason, it would seem that it must have been obvious to Na
poleon that by advancing thirteen hundred miles and giving battle with a probabil
ity of losing a quarter of his army, he was advancing to certain destruction, and
 it must have been equally clear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking 
the loss of a quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For Kutuzov thi
s was mathematically clear, as it is that if when playing draughts I have one man
 less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly lose, and therefore should not exch
ange. When my opponent has sixteen men and I have fourteen, I am only one eighth 
weaker than he, but when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three time
s as strong as I am.  Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to
 the French was about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more th
an one to two previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred and twenty t
housand afterwards little more than fifty thousand against a hundred thousand. Ye
t the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted the battle, while Napoleon, who was
 said to be a commander of genius, gave it, losing a quarter of his army and leng
thening his lines of communication still more. If it is said that he expected to 
end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign by occup
ying Vienna, there is much evidence to the contrary. Napoleon's historians themse
lves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished to stop, knew the danger of his
 extended position, and knew that the occupation of Moscow would not be the end o
f the campaign, for he had seen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were
 left to him, and had not received a single reply to his repeated announcements o
f his wish to negotiate.  In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov act
ed involuntarily and irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the hi
storians provided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of the g
enerals who, of all the blind tools of history were the most enslaved and involun
tary.  The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnish t
he whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustom ourselves to 
the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind are meaningless.  On the other
 question, how the battle of Borodino and the preceding battle of Shevardino were
 fought, there also exists a definite and wellknown, but quite false, conception.
 All the historians describe the affair as follows  The Russian army, they say, i
n its retreat from Smolensk sought out for itself the best position for a general
 engagement and found such a position at Borodino.  The Russians, they say, forti
fied this position in advance on the left of the highroad from Moscow to Smolensk
 and almost at a right angle to it, from Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place wh
ere the battle was fought.  In front of this position, they say, a fortified outp
ost was set up on the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twentyfourth,
 we are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on the twent
ysixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position on the field of Bo
rodino.  So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares to 
look into the matter can easily convince himself.  The Russians did not seek out 
the best position but, on the contrary, during the retreat passed many positions 
better than Borodino. They did not stop at any one of these positions because Kut
uzov did not wish to occupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the pop
ular demand for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough, and becaus
e Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many other reasons. 
The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger, and that the posi
tion at Borodino the one where the battle was fought, far from being strong, was 
no more a position than any other spot one might find in the Russian Empire by st
icking a pin into the map at hazard.  Not only did the Russians not fortify the p
osition on the field of Borodino to the left of, and at a right angle to, the hig
hroad that is, the position on which the battle took place, but never till the tw
entyfifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might be fought there. Th
is was shown first by the fact that there were no entrenchments there by the twen
ty fifth and that those begun on the twentyfifth and twentysixth were not complet
ed, and secondly, by the position of the Shevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was qui
te senseless in front of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was it m
ore strongly fortified than any other post? And why were all efforts exhausted an
d six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on the twentyfourth
? A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof th
at the position on which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the
 Shevardino Redoubt was not an advanced post of that position, we have the fact t
hat up to the twentyfifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the
 Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position, and that Kutuzov himself 
in his report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of the Shevardino Re
doubt as the left flank of the position. It was much later, when reports on the b
attle of Borodino were written at leisure, that the incorrect and extraordinary s
tatement was invented probably to justify the mistakes of a commander in chief wh
o had to be represented as infallible that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced
 postwhereas in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flankand that
 the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position previously sel
ected, where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot which was almost unentre
nched.  The case was evidently this a position was selected along the river Koloc
hawhich crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute angleso that th
e left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank near the village of Novoe, and th
e center at Borodino at the confluence of the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.  To anyon
e who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how the battle was actua
lly fought, this position, protected by the river Kolocha, presents itself as obv
ious for an army whose object was to prevent an enemy from advancing along the Sm
olensk road to Moscow.  Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twentyfourth, did not 
see as the history books say he did the position of the Russians from Utitsa to B
orodino he could not have seen that position because it did not exist, nor did he
 see an advanced post of the Russian army, but while pursuing the Russian reargua
rd he came upon the left flank of the Russian positionat the Shevardino Redoubtan
d unexpectedly for the Russians moved his army across the Kolocha. And the Russia
ns, not having time to begin a general engagement, withdrew their left wing from 
the position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which had not
 been foreseen and was not fortified. By crossing to the other side of the Koloch
a to the left of the highroad, Napoleon shifted the whole forthcoming battle from
 right to left looking from the Russian side and transferred it to the plain betw
een Utitsa, Semenovsk, and Borodinoa plain no more advantageous as a position tha
n any other plain in Russiaand there the whole battle of the twentysixth of Augus
t took place.  Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twentyfourth to 
the Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubt but h
ad begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted that the Shevardino R
edoubt was the left flank of our position, and the battle would have taken place 
where we expected it. In that case we should probably have defended the Shevardin
o Redoubtour left flankstill more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon i
n the center or on the right, and the engagement would have taken place on the tw
entyfifth, in the position we intended and had fortified. But as the attack on ou
r left flank took place in the evening after the retreat of our rear guard that i
s, immediately after the fight at Gridneva, and as the Russian commanders did not
 wish, or were not in time, to begin a general engagement then on the evening of 
the twentyfourth, the first and chief action of the battle of Borodino was alread
y lost on the twentyfourth, and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on th
e twentysixth.  After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves on t
he morning of the twentyfifth without a position for our left flank, and were for
ced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced to be.  Not only was
 the Russian army on the twentysixth defended by weak, unfinished entrenchments, 
but the disadvantage of that position was increased by the fact that the Russian 
commandersnot having fully realized what had happened, namely the loss of our pos
ition on the left flank and the shifting of the whole field of the forthcoming ba
ttle from right to leftmaintained their extended position from the village of Nov
oe to Utitsa, and consequently had to move their forces from right to left during
 the battle. So it happened that throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed
 the entire French army launched against our left flank with but half as many men
. Poniatowski's action against Utitsa, and Uvarov's on the right flank against th
e French, were actions distinct from the main course of the battle. So the battle
 of Borodino did not take place at all as in an effort to conceal our commanders'
 mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and p
eople it has been described. The battle of Borodino was not fought on a chosen an
d entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker than those of the enemy, b
ut, as a result of the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, the Russians fought the ba
ttle of Borodino on an open and almost unentrenched position, with forces only ha
lf as numerous as the French that is to say, under conditions in which it was not
 merely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive result, but u
nthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegration and flight.      CHA
PTER XX   On the morning of the twentyfifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk. At the d
escent of the high steep hill, down which a winding road led out of the town past
 the cathedral on the right, where a service was being held and the bells were ri
nging, Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded on foot. Behind him a cavalry 
regiment was coming down the hill preceded by its singers. Coming up toward him w
as a train of carts carrying men who had been wounded in the engagement the day b
efore. The peasant drivers, shouting and lashing their horses, kept crossing from
 side to side. The carts, in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were ly
ing or sitting, jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steep incline 
to make it something like a road. The wounded, bandaged with rags, with pale chee
ks, compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to the sides of the carts as they
 were jolted against one another. Almost all of them stared with naive, childlike
 curiosity at Pierre's white hat and green swallowtail coat.  Pierre's coachman s
houted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep to one side of the road. The cava
lry regiment, as it descended the hill with its singers, surrounded Pierre's carr
iage and blocked the road. Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the 
cutting in which the road ran. The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrat
e into the cutting and there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre's head was th
e bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily. One of the carts with wou
nded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre. The driver in his bast shoe
s ran panting up to it, placed a stone under one of its tireless hind wheels, and
 began arranging the breechband on his little horse.  One of the wounded, an old 
soldier with a bandaged arm who was following the cart on foot, caught hold of it
 with his sound hand and turned to look at Pierre.  "I say, fellow countryman! Wi
ll they set us down here or take us on to Moscow?" he asked.  Pierre was so deep 
in thought that he did not hear the question. He was looking now at the cavalry r
egiment that had met the convoy of wounded, now at the cart by which he was stand
ing, in which two wounded men were sitting and one was lying. One of those sittin
g up in the cart had probably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapp
ed in rags and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby's head. His nose and m
outh were twisted to one side. This soldier was looking at the cathedral and cros
sing himself. Another, a young lad, a fairhaired recruit as white as though there
 was no blood in his thin face, looked at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The 
third lay prone so that his face was not visible. The cavalry singers were passin
g close by     Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,    Living in a foreign 
land.  they sang their soldiers' dance song.  As if responding to them but with a
 different sort of merriment, the metallic sound of the bells reverberated high a
bove and the hot rays of the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet an
other sort of merriment. But beneath the slope, by the cart with the wounded near
 the panting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.  The so
ldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalry singers.  "Oh, the cox
combs!" he muttered reproachfully.  "It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen pe
asants today, too.... The peasantseven they have to go," said the soldier behind 
the cart, addressing Pierre with a sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays.... 
They want the whole nation to fall on themin a word, it's Moscow! They want to ma
ke an end of it."  In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre unders
tood what he wanted to say and nodded approval.  The road was clear again Pierre 
descended the hill and drove on.  He kept looking to either side of the road for 
familiar faces, but only saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military 
men of different branches of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his
 white hat and green tail coat.  Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an
 acquaintance and eagerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. H
e was driving toward Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a young surgeon, and
 on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver's seat to pull
 up.  "Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.  "Well
, you know, I wanted to see..."  "Yes, yes, there will be something to see...."  
Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention of taking part 
in a battle.  The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov.  "Why should you
 be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?" he said, exchanging glances
 with his young companion. "Anyhow his Serene Highness knows you and will receive
 you graciously. That's what you must do."  The doctor seemed tired and in a hurr
y.  "You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position is exactly?
" said Pierre.  "The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line. D
rive past Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hillock and y
ou'll see."  "Can one see from there?... If you would..."  But the doctor interru
pted him and moved toward his gig.  "I would go with you but on my honor I'm up t
o here"and he pointed to his throat. "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps
. How do matters stand?... You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow. Out of
 an army of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded, a
nd we haven't stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough for six thousa
nd. We have ten thousand carts, but we need other things as wellwe must manage as
 best we can!"  The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, 
who had stared with merry surprise at his hat perhaps the very men he had noticed
, twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and death amazed Pierre.  "The
y may die tomorrow why are they thinking of anything but death?" And by some late
nt sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill, the carts with the wound
ed, the ringing bells, the slanting rays of the sun, and the songs of the cavalry
men vividly recurred to his mind.  "The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wound
ed and do not for a moment think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the
 wounded. Yet from among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wo
nder at my hat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatarinova.  In f
ront of a landowner's house to the left of the road stood carriages, wagons, and 
crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander in chief was putting up there, b
ut just when Pierre arrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff were theret
hey had gone to the church service. Pierre drove on toward Gorki.  When he had as
cended the hill and reached the little village street, he saw for the first time 
peasant militiamen in their white shirts and with crosses on their caps, who, tal
king and laughing loudly, animated and perspiring, were at work on a huge knoll o
vergrown with grass to the right of the road.  Some of them were digging, others 
were wheeling barrowloads of earth along planks, while others stood about doing n
othing.  Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeing th
ese peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of their position as
 soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men at Mozhaysk and understood
 what the soldier had meant when he said "They want the whole nation to fall on t
hem." The sight of these bearded peasants at work on the battlefield, with their 
queer, clumsy boots and perspiring necks, and their shirts opening from the left 
toward the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressed Pi
erre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the moment than anything 
he had yet seen or heard.      CHAPTER XXI   Pierre stepped out of his carriage a
nd, passing the toiling militiamen, ascended the knoll from which, according to t
he doctor, the battlefield could be seen.  It was about eleven o'clock. The sun s
hone somewhat to the left and behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panoram
a which, rising like an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied a
tmosphere.  From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolen
sk highroad, passing through a village with a white church some five hundred pace
s in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodino. Below the village the ro
ad crossed the river by a bridge and, winding down and up, rose higher and higher
 to the village of Valuevo visible about four miles away, where Napoleon was then
 stationed. Beyond Valuevo the road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the ho
rizon. Far in the distance in that birch and fir forest to the right of the road,
 the cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery gleamed in the sun. Here and there
 over the whole of that blue expanse, to right and left of the forest and the roa
d, smoking campfires could be seen and indefinite masses of troopsours and the en
emy's. The ground to the rightalong the course of the Kolocha and Moskva riverswa
s broken and hilly. Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino sh
owed in the distance. On the left the ground was more level there were fields of 
grain, and the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down, could be s
een.  All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor the right s
ide of the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere could he see the battl
efield he had expected to find, but only fields, meadows, troops, woods, the smok
e of campfires, villages, mounds, and streams and try as he would he could descry
 no military "position" in this place which teemed with life, nor could he even d
istinguish our troops from the enemy's.  "I must ask someone who knows," he thoug
ht, and addressed an officer who was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitar
y figure.  "May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"  "Burdi
no, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.  "Borodino," the other
 corrected him.  The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved 
up to Pierre.  "Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.  "Yes, and there, furt
her on, are the French," said the officer. "There they are, there... you can see 
them."  "Where? Where?" asked Pierre.  "One can see them with the naked eye... Wh
y, there!"  The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the left be
yond the river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierre had noticed
 on many of the faces he had met came into his face.  "Ah, those are the French! 
And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a knoll on the left, near which some troops
 could be seen.  "Those are ours."  "Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to a
nother knoll in the distance with a big tree on it, near a village that lay in a 
hollow where also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible.  "
That's his again," said the officer. It was the Shevardino Redoubt. "It was ours 
yesterday, but now it is his."  "Then how about our position?"  "Our position?" r
eplied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I can tell you quite clearly, b
ecause I constructed nearly all our entrenchments. There, you see? There's our ce
nter, at Borodino, just there," and he pointed to the village in front of them wi
th the white church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. You see down there wh
ere the rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there's the bridge. That's our cente
r. Our right flank is over there"he pointed sharply to the right, far away in the
 broken ground"That's where the Moskva River is, and we have thrown up three redo
ubts there, very strong ones. The left flank..." here the officer paused. "Well, 
you see, that's difficult to explain.... Yesterday our left flank was there at Sh
evardino, you see, where the oak is, but now we have withdrawn our left wingnow i
t is over there, do you see that village and the smoke? That's Semenovsk, yes, th
ere," he pointed to Raevski's knoll. "But the battle will hardly be there. His ha
ving moved his troops there is only a ruse he will probably pass round to the rig
ht of the Moskva. But wherever it may be, many a man will be missing tomorrow!" h
e remarked.  An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was givi
ng these explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking, but at th
is point, evidently not liking the officer's remark, interrupted him.  "Gabions m
ust be sent for," said he sternly.  The officer appeared abashed, as though he un
derstood that one might think of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought
 not to speak of it.  "Well, send number three company again," the officer replie
d hurriedly.  "And you, are you one of the doctors?"  "No, I've come on my own," 
answered Pierre, and he went down the hill again, passing the militiamen.  "Oh, t
hose damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him, holding his nose as 
he ran past the men at work.  "There they are... bringing her, coming... There th
ey are... They'll be here in a minute..." voices were suddenly heard saying and o
fficers, soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.  A church
 procession was coming up the hill from Borodino. First along the dusty road came
 the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with arms reversed. From behind them came 
the sound of church singing.  Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre 
toward the procession.  "They are bringing her, our Protectress!... The Iberian M
other of God!" someone cried.  "The Smolensk Mother of God," another corrected hi
m.  The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who had been
 at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet the church proce
ssion. Following the battalion that marched along the dusty road came priests in 
their vestmentsone little old man in a hood with attendants and singers. Behind t
hem soldiers and officers bore a large, darkfaced icon with an embossed metal cov
er. This was the icon that had been brought from Smolensk and had since accompani
ed the army. Behind, before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen with bared h
eads walked, ran, and bowed to the ground.  At the summit of the hill they stoppe
d with the icon the men who had been holding it up by the linen bands attached to
 it were relieved by others, the chanters relit their censers, and service began.
 The hot rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played with t
he hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon. The singing 
did not sound loud under the open sky. An immense crowd of bareheaded officers, s
oldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon. Behind the priest and a chanter stoo
d the notabilities on a spot reserved for them. A bald general with a St. George'
s Cross on his neck stood just behind the priest's back, and without crossing him
self he was evidently a German patiently awaited the end of the service, which he
 considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse the patriotism of
 the Russian people. Another general stood in a martial pose, crossing himself by
 shaking his hand in front of his chest while looking about him. Standing among t
he crowd of peasants, Pierre recognized several acquaintances among these notable
s, but did not look at themhis whole attention was absorbed in watching the serio
us expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were all g
azing eagerly at the icon. As soon as the tired chanters, who were singing the se
rvice for the twentieth time that day, began lazily and mechanically to sing "Sav
e from calamity Thy servants, O Mother of God," and the priest and deacon chimed 
in "For to Thee under God we all flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection,
" there again kindled in all those faces the same expression of consciousness of 
the solemnity of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the fo
ot of the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met that
 morning and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back, and sighs and
 the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.  The crowd round the i
con suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre. Someone, a very important persona
ge judging by the haste with which way was made for him, was approaching the icon
.  It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round the position and on his way back to 
Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held. Pierre recognized him at
 once by his peculiar figure, which distinguished him from everybody else.  With 
a long overcoat on his exceedingly stout, roundshouldered body, with uncovered wh
ite head and puffy face showing the white ball of the eye he had lost, Kutuzov wa
lked with plunging, swaying gait into the crowd and stopped behind the priest. He
 crossed himself with an accustomed movement, bent till he touched the ground wit
h his hand, and bowed his white head with a deep sigh. Behind Kutuzov was Bennigs
en and the suite. Despite the presence of the commander in chief, who attracted t
he attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldiers continued 
their prayers without looking at him.  When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped
 up to the icon, sank heavily to his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long t
ime tried vainly to rise, but could not do so on account of his weakness and weig
ht. His white head twitched with the effort. At last he rose, kissed the icon as 
a child does with naively pouting lips, and again bowed till he touched the groun
d with his hand. The other generals followed his example, then the officers, and 
after them with excited faces, pressing on one another, crowding, panting, and pu
shing, scrambled the soldiers and militiamen.      CHAPTER XXII   Staggering amid
 the crush, Pierre looked about him.  "Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get he
re?" said a voice.  Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushing his knees wit
h his hand he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon, c
ame up to him smiling. Boris was elegantly dressed, with a slightly martial touch
 appropriate to a campaign. He wore a long coat and like Kutuzov had a whip slung
 across his shoulder.  Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himse
lf in the shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run to fet
ch and another had hastily covered with a rug. An immense and brilliant suite sur
rounded him.  The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierre sto
pped some thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.  He explained his wish to 
be present at the battle and to see the position.  "This is what you must do," sa
id Boris. "I will do the honors of the camp to you. You will see everything best 
from where Count Bennigsen will be. I am in attendance on him, you know I'll ment
ion it to him. But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us. We
 are just going to the left flank. Then when we get back, do spend the night with
 me and we'll arrange a game of cards. Of course you know Dmitri Sergeevich? Thos
e are his quarters," and he pointed to the third house in the village of Gorki.  
"But I should like to see the right flank. They say it's very strong," said Pierr
e. "I should like to start from the Moskva River and ride round the whole positio
n."  "Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the left flank."  "Yes,
 yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you point it out to me?"  "Pr
ince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him."  "What about the left 
flank?" asked Pierre  "To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows w
hat state our left flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowering his voice. "I
t is not at all what Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortify that knoll qui
te differently, but..." Boris shrugged his shoulders, "his Serene Highness would 
not have it, or someone persuaded him. You see..." but Boris did not finish, for 
at that moment Kaysarov, Kutuzov's adjutant, came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!" s
aid Boris, addressing him with an unembarrassed smile, "I was just trying to expl
ain our position to the count. It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so for
esee the intentions of the French!"  "You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov.  
"Yes, exactly the left flank is now extremely strong."  Though Kutuzov had dismis
sed all unnecessary men from the staff, Boris had contrived to remain at headquar
ters after the changes. He had established himself with Count Bennigsen, who, lik
e all on whom Boris had been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskoy an
 invaluable man.  In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties Ku
tuzov's party and that of Bennigsen, the chief of staff. Boris belonged to the la
tter and no one else, while showing servile respect to Kutuzov, could so create a
n impression that the old fellow was not much good and that Bennigsen managed eve
rything. Now the decisive moment of battle had come when Kutuzov would be destroy
ed and the power pass to Bennigsen, or even if Kutuzov won the battle it would be
 felt that everything was done by Bennigsen. In any case many great rewards would
 have to be given for tomorrow's action, and new men would come to the front. So 
Boris was full of nervous vivacity all day.  After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre k
new came up to him, and he had not time to reply to all the questions about Mosco
w that were showered upon him, or to listen to all that was told him. The faces a
ll expressed animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause o
f the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in questions of persona
l success his mind, however, was occupied by the different expression he saw on o
ther facesan expression that spoke not of personal matters but of the universal q
uestions of life and death. Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure and the group gathere
d round him.  "Call him to me," said Kutuzov.  An adjutant told Pierre of his Ser
ene Highness' wish, and Pierre went toward Kutuzov's bench. But a militiaman got 
there before him. It was Dolokhov.  "How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre.
  "He's a creature that wriggles in anywhere!" was the answer. "He has been degra
ded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's been proposing some scheme or o
ther and has crawled into the enemy's picket line at night.... He's a brave fello
w."  Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov.  "I concluded tha
t if I reported to your Serene Highness you might send me away or say that you kn
ew what I was reporting, but then I shouldn't lose anything..." Dolokhov was sayi
ng.  "Yes, yes."  "But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to my Fat
herland for which I am ready to die."  "Yes, yes."  "And should your Serene Highn
ess require a man who will not spare his skin, please think of me.... Perhaps I m
ay prove useful to your Serene Highness."  "Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his 
laughing eye narrowing more and more as he looked at Pierre.  Just then Boris, wi
th his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up to Pierre's side near Kutuzov and in a
 most natural manner, without raising his voice, said to Pierre, as though contin
uing an interrupted conversation  "The militia have put on clean white shirts to 
be ready to die. What heroism, Count!"  Boris evidently said this to Pierre in or
der to be overheard by his Serene Highness. He knew Kutuzov's attention would be 
caught by those words, and so it was.  "What are you saying about the militia?" h
e asked Boris.  "Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene Highnessfor deaththey have p
ut on clean shirts."  "Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov and h
e closed his eyes and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with a s
igh.  "So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said to Pierre. "Yes, it's a pleasant 
smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers. Is she well? My quarter
s are at your service."  And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began look
ing about absentmindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.  Then, evid
ently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrew Kaysarov, his adjutant's 
brother.  "Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they go, eh? Those h
e wrote about Gerakov 'Lectures for the corps inditing'... Recite them, recite th
em!" said he, evidently preparing to laugh.  Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smiling
ly nodded his head to the rhythm of the verses.  When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Do
lokhov came up to him and took his hand.  "I am very glad to meet you here, Count
," he said aloud, regardless of the presence of strangers and in a particularly r
esolute and solemn tone. "On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is f
ated to survive, I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret the misu
nderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not to have any ill fe
eling for me. I beg you to forgive me."  Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, 
not knowing what to say to him. With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre a
nd kissed him.  Boris said a few words to his general, and Count Bennigsen turned
 to Pierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line.  "It will in
terest you," said he.  "Yes, very much," replied Pierre.  Half an hour later Kutu
zov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen and his suite, with Pierre among them, set
 out on their ride along the line.      CHAPTER XXIII   From Gorki, Bennigsen des
cended the highroad to the bridge which, when they had looked at it from the hill
, the officer had pointed out as being the center of our position and where rows 
of fragrant newmown hay lay by the riverside. They rode across that bridge into t
he village of Borodino and thence turned to the left, passing an enormous number 
of troops and guns, and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging. This 
was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, which afterwards became known as the Raevski Red
oubt, or the Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no special attention to it. He did no
t know that it would become more memorable to him than any other spot on the plai
n of Borodino.  They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers wer
e dragging away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rode downhill an
d uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if by hail, following a tr
ack freshly made by the artillery over the furrows of the plowed land, and reache
d some fleches * which were still being dug.       * A kind of entrenchment.   At
 the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shevardino Redoubt opposi
te, which had been ours the day before and where several horsemen could be descri
ed. The officers said that either Napoleon or Murat was there, and they all gazed
 eagerly at this little group of horsemen. Pierre also looked at them, trying to 
guess which of the scarcely discernible figures was Napoleon. At last those mount
ed men rode away from the mound and disappeared.  Bennigsen spoke to a general wh
o approached him, and began explaining the whole position of our troops. Pierre l
istened to him, straining each faculty to understand the essential points of the 
impending battle, but was mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequa
te for the task. He could make nothing of it. Bennigsen stopped speaking and, not
icing that Pierre was listening, suddenly said to him  "I don't think this intere
sts you?"  "On the contrary it's very interesting!" replied Pierre not quite trut
hfully.  From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a road windi
ng through a thick, lowgrowing birch wood. In the middle of the wood a brown hare
 with white feet sprang out and, scared by the tramp of the many horses, grew so 
confused that it leaped along the road in front of them for some time, arousing g
eneral attention and laughter, and only when several voices shouted at it did it 
dart to one side and disappear in the thicket. After going through the wood for a
bout a mile and a half they came out on a glade where troops of Tuchkov's corps w
ere stationed to defend the left flank.  Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigs
en talked a great deal and with much heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orde
rs of great military importance. In front of Tuchkov's troops was some high groun
d not occupied by troops. Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, saying that i
t was madness to leave a height which commanded the country around unoccupied and
 to place troops below it. Some of the generals expressed the same opinion. One i
n particular declared with martial heat that they were put there to be slaughtere
d. Bennigsen on his own authority ordered the troops to occupy the high ground. T
his disposition on the left flank increased Pierre's doubt of his own capacity to
 understand military matters. Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing
 the position of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them and shared 
their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understand how the man who p
ut them there behind the hill could have made so gross and palpable a blunder.  P
ierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennigsen supposed, put there t
o defend the position, but were in a concealed position as an ambush, that they s
hould not be seen and might be able to strike an approaching enemy unexpectedly. 
Bennigsen did not know this and moved the troops forward according to his own ide
as without mentioning the matter to the commander in chief.      CHAPTER XXIV   O
n that bright evening of August 25, Prince Andrew lay leaning on his elbow in a b
rokendown shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the further end of his regiment's e
ncampment. Through a gap in the broken wall he could see, beside the wooden fence
, a row of thirty yearold birches with their lower branches lopped off, a field o
n which shocks of oats were standing, and some bushes near which rose the smoke o
f campfiresthe soldiers' kitchens.  Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone a
s his life now seemed to him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated an
d irritable as he had done seven years before at Austerlitz.  He had received and
 given the orders for next day's battle and had nothing more to do. But his thoug
htsthe simplest, clearest, and therefore most terrible thoughtswould give him no 
peace. He knew that tomorrow's battle would be the most terrible of all he had ta
ken part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility of death presente
d itself to himnot in relation to any worldly matter or with reference to its eff
ect on others, but simply in relation to himself, to his own soulvividly, plainly
, terribly, and almost as a certainty. And from the height of this perception all
 that had previously tormented and preoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a
 cold white light without shadows, without perspective, without distinction of ou
tline. All life appeared to him like magiclantern pictures at which he had long b
een gazing by artificial light through a glass. Now he suddenly saw those badly d
aubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass. "Yes, yes! There they are, 
those false images that agitated, enraptured, and tormented me," said he to himse
lf, passing in review the principal pictures of the magic lantern of life and reg
arding them now in the cold white daylight of his clear perception of death. "The
re they are, those rudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysteriou
s. Glory, the good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itselfhow importan
t these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they seemed to be fil
led! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the cold white light of this mor
ning which I feel is dawning for me." The three great sorrows of his life held hi
s attention in particular his love for a woman, his father's death, and the Frenc
h invasion which had overrun half Russia. "Love... that little girl who seemed to
 me brimming over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I made romantic p
lans of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I was!" he said aloud bitterl
y. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal love which was to keep her faithful to me for
 the whole year of my absence! Like the gentle dove in the fable she was to pine 
apart from me.... But it was much simpler really.... It was all very simple and h
orrible."  "When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his his land
, his air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside, unconscious of hi
s existence, as he might brush a chip from his path, and his Bald Hills and his w
hole life fell to pieces. Princess Mary says it is a trial sent from above. What 
is the trial for, when he is not here and will never return? He is not here! For 
whom then is the trial intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! And t
omorrow I shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our own 
men, by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of them did yesterd
ay, and the French will come and take me by head and heels and fling me into a ho
le that I may not stink under their noses, and new conditions of life will arise,
 which will seem quite ordinary to others and about which I shall know nothing. I
 shall not exist..."  He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, wi
th their motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark. "To die... to be kil
led tomorrow... That I should not exist... That all this should still be, but no 
me...."  And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the smoke 
of the campfires, and all that was around him changed and seemed terrible and men
acing. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He rose quickly, went out of the shed, a
nd began to walk about.  After he had returned, voices were heard outside the she
d. "Who's that?" he cried.  The rednosed Captain Timokhin, formerly Dolokhov's sq
uadron commander, but now from lack of officers a battalion commander, shyly ente
red the shed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster.  Prince Andrew
 rose hastily, listened to the business they had come about, gave them some furth
er instructions, and was about to dismiss them when he heard a familiar, lisping,
 voice behind the shed.  "Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over 
something.  Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had tripped 
over a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. It was unpleasan
t to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general, and Pierre especiall
y, for he reminded him of all the painful moments of his last visit to Moscow.  "
You? What a surprise!" said he. "What brings you here? This is unexpected!"  As h
e said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldnessthey expressed hostilit
y, which Pierre noticed at once. He had approached the shed full of animation, bu
t on seeing Prince Andrew's face he felt constrained and ill at ease.  "I have co
me... simply... you know... come... it interests me," said Pierre, who had so oft
en that day senselessly repeated that word "interesting." "I wish to see the batt
le."  "Oh yes, and what do the Masonic brothers say about war? How would they sto
p it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's Moscow? And my people? 
Have they reached Moscow at last?" he asked seriously.  "Yes, they have. Julie Dr
ubetskaya told me so. I went to see them, but missed them. They have gone to your
 estate near Moscow."      CHAPTER XXV   The officers were about to take leave, b
ut Prince Andrew, apparently reluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked th
em to stay and have tea. Seats were brought in and so was the tea. The officers g
azed with surprise at Pierre's huge stout figure and listened to his talk of Mosc
ow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden. Prince Andrew remaine
d silent, and his expression was so forbidding that Pierre addressed his remarks 
chiefly to the goodnatured battalion commander.  "So you understand the whole pos
ition of our troops?" Prince Andrew interrupted him.  "Yesthat is, how do you mea
n?" said Pierre. "Not being a military man I can't say I have understood it fully
, but I understand the general position."  "Well, then, you know more than anyone
 else, be it who it may," said Prince Andrew.  "Oh!" said Pierre, looking over hi
s spectacles in perplexity at Prince Andrew. "Well, and what do you think of Kutu
zov's appointment?" he asked.  "I was very glad of his appointment, that's all I 
know," replied Prince Andrew.  "And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly. In 
Moscow they are saying heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?"
  "Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.  Pierre looked at T
imokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smile with which everybody involun
tarily addressed that officer.  "We see light again, since his Serenity has been 
appointed, your excellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning to gl
ance at his colonel.  "Why so?" asked Pierre.  "Well, to mention only firewood an
d fodder, let me inform you. Why, when we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare
 not touch a stick or a wisp of hay or anything. You see, we were going away, so 
he would get it all wasn't it so, your excellency?" and again Timokhin turned to 
the prince. "But we daren't. In our regiment two officers were courtmartialed for
 that kind of thing. But when his Serenity took command everything became straigh
t forward. Now we see light..."  "Then why was it forbidden?"  Timokhin looked ab
out in confusion, not knowing what or how to answer such a question. Pierre put t
he same question to Prince Andrew.  "Why, so as not to lay waste the country we w
ere abandoning to the enemy," said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very
 sound one can't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops to maraud
ing. At Smolensk too he judged correctly that the French might outflank us, as th
ey had larger forces. But he could not understand this," cried Prince Andrew in a
 shrill voice that seemed to escape him involuntarily "he could not understand th
at there, for the first time, we were fighting for Russian soil, and that there w
as a spirit in the men such as I had never seen before, that we had held the Fren
ch for two days, and that that success had increased our strength tenfold. He ord
ered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing. He had no th
ought of betraying us, he tried to do the best he could, he thought out everythin
g, and that is why he is unsuitable. He is unsuitable now, just because he plans 
out everything very thoroughly and accurately as every German has to. How can I e
xplain?... Well, say your father has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet a
nd satisfies your father's requirements better than you could, then it's all righ
t to let him serve. But if your father is mortally sick you'll send the valet awa
y and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands, and will so
othe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could. So it has been with B
arclay. While Russia was well, a foreigner could serve her and be a splendid mini
ster but as soon as she is in danger she needs one of her own kin. But in your Cl
ub they have been making him out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and th
e only result will be that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they w
ill make him out a hero or a genius instead of a traitor, and that will be still 
more unjust. He is an honest and very punctilious German."  "And they say he's a 
skillful commander," rejoined Pierre.  "I don't understand what is meant by 'a sk
illful commander,'" replied Prince Andrew ironically.  "A skillful commander?" re
plied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees all contingencies... and foresees the advers
ary's intentions."  "But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a m
atter settled long ago.  Pierre looked at him in surprise.  "And yet they say tha
t war is like a game of chess?" he remarked.  "Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but 
with this little difference, that in chess you may think over each move as long a
s you please and are not limited for time, and with this difference too, that a k
night is always stronger than a pawn, and two pawns are always stronger than one,
 while in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimes wea
ker than a company. The relative strength of bodies of troops can never be known 
to anyone. Believe me," he went on, "if things depended on arrangements made by t
he staff, I should be there making arrangements, but instead of that I have the h
onor to serve here in the regiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on u
s tomorrow's battle will depend and not on those others.... Success never depends
, and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers, and least
 of all on position."  "But on what then?"  "On the feeling that is in me and in 
him," he pointed to Timokhin, "and in each soldier."  Prince Andrew glanced at Ti
mokhin, who looked at his commander in alarm and bewilderment. In contrast to his
 former reticent taciturnity Prince Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparentl
y not refrain from expressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him.  "A
 battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we lose the battle 
at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours, but very early we sai
d to ourselves that we were losing the battle, and we did lose it. And we said so
 because we had nothing to fight for there, we wanted to get away from the battle
field as soon as we could. 'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran. If we had not
 said that till the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened. But tomor
row we shan't say it! You talk about our position, the left flank weak and the ri
ght flank too extended," he went on. "That's all nonsense, there's nothing of the
 kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A hundred million most diverse chances which 
will be decided on the instant by the fact that our men or theirs run or do not r
un, and that this man or that man is killed, but all that is being done at presen
t is only play. The fact is that those men with whom you have ridden round the po
sition not only do not help matters, but hinder. They are only concerned with the
ir own petty interests."  "At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully.  "At suc
h a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated. "To them it is only a moment affording oppor
tunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra cross or ribbon. For me tomorro
w means this a Russian army of a hundred thousand and a French army of a hundred 
thousand have met to fight, and the thing is that these two hundred thousand men 
will fight and the side that fights more fiercely and spares itself least will wi
n. And if you like I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles tho
se at the top may make, we shall win tomorrow's battle. Tomorrow, happen what may
, we shall win!"  "There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth,"
 said Timokhin. "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion, belie
ve me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day for that!' they say."  All w
ere silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the shed with them, givi
ng final orders to the adjutant. After they had gone Pierre approached Prince And
rew and was about to start a conversation when they heard the clatter of three ho
rses' hoofs on the road not far from the shed, and looking in that direction Prin
ce Andrew recognized Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack. They rode 
close by continuing to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard these word
s  "Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genug Preis
 geben," * said one of them.        * "The war must be extended widely. I cannot 
sufficiently      commend that view."   "Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist 
nur den Feind zu schwachen, so kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der PrivatPerson
en in Achtung nehmen." *        * "Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, 
so of      course one cannot take into account the loss of private      individua
ls."   "Oh, no," agreed the other.  "Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an a
ngry snort, when they had ridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and
 sister, at Bald Hills. That's all the same to him! That's what I was saying to y
outhose German gentlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but will only make all the
 mess they can, because they have nothing in their German heads but theories not 
worth an empty eggshell and haven't in their hearts the one thing needed tomorrow
that which Timokhin has. They have yielded up all Europe to him, and have now com
e to teach us. Fine teachers!" and again his voice grew shrill.  "So you think we
 shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre.  "Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew 
absently. "One thing I would do if I had the power," he began again, "I would not
 take prisoners. Why take prisoners? It's chivalry! The French have destroyed my 
home and are on their way to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are outraging
 me every moment. They are my enemies. In my opinion they are all criminals. And 
so thinks Timokhin and the whole army. They should be executed! Since they are my
 foes they cannot be my friends, whatever may have been said at Tilsit."  "Yes, y
es," muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew. "I quite agree 
with you!"  The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all t
hat day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He now understood th
e whole meaning and importance of this war and of the impending battle. All he ha
d seen that day, all the significant and stern expressions on the faces he had se
en in passing, were lit up for him by a new light. He understood that latent heat
 as they say in physics of patriotism which was present in all these men he had s
een, and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly, and as it 
were lightheartedly.  "Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued "That by itse
lf would quite change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we have play
ed at warthat's what's vile! We play at magnanimity and all that stuff. Such magn
animity and sensibility are like the magnanimity and sensibility of a lady who fa
ints when she sees a calf being killed she is so kindhearted that she can't look 
at blood, but enjoys eating the calf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the
 rules of war, of chivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so
 on. It's all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805 they humbugged u
s and we humbugged them. They plunder other people's houses, issue false paper mo
ney, and worst of all they kill my children and my father, and then talk of rules
 of war and magnanimity to foes! Take no prisoners, but kill and be killed! He wh
o has come to this as I have through the same sufferings..."  Prince Andrew, who 
had thought it was all the same to him whether or not Moscow was taken as Smolens
k had been, was suddenly checked in his speech by an unexpected cramp in his thro
at. He paced up and down a few times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishl
y and his lips quivered as he began speaking.  "If there was none of this magnani
mity in war, we should go to war only when it was worth while going to certain de
ath, as now. Then there would not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Mich
ael Ivanovich. And when there was a war, like this one, it would be war! And then
 the determination of the troops would be quite different. Then all these Westpha
lians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leading would not follow him into Russia, and
 we should not go to fight in Austria and Prussia without knowing why. War is not
 courtesy but the most horrible thing in life and we ought to understand that and
 not play at war. We ought to accept this terrible necessity sternly and seriousl
y. It all lies in that get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game. As
 it is now, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The military c
alling is the most highly honored.  "But what is war? What is needed for success 
in warfare? What are the habits of the military? The aim of war is murder the met
hods of war are spying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a country
's inhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army, and fraud and fal
sehood termed military craft. The habits of the military class are the absence of
 freedom, that is, discipline, idleness, ignorance, cruelty, debauchery, and drun
kenness. And in spite of all this it is the highest class, respected by everyone.
 All the kings, except the Chinese, wear military uniforms, and he who kills most
 people receives the highest rewards.  "They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to 
murder one another they kill and maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksgivi
ng services for having killed so many people they even exaggerate the number, and
 they announce a victory, supposing that the more people they have killed the gre
ater their achievement. How does God above look at them and hear them?" exclaimed
 Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercing voice. "Ah, my friend, it has of late become
 hard for me to live. I see that I have begun to understand too much. And it does
n't do for man to taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil.... Ah, well, i
t's not for long!" he added.  "However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sl
eep. Go back to Gorki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly.  "Oh no!" Pierre replied, lo
oking at Prince Andrew with frightened, compassionate eyes.  "Go, go! Before a ba
ttle one must have one's sleep out," repeated Prince Andrew.  He came quickly up 
to Pierre and embraced and kissed him. "Goodby, be off!" he shouted. "Whether we 
meet again or not..." and turning away hurriedly he entered the shed.  It was alr
eady dark, and Pierre could not make out whether the expression of Prince Andrew'
s face was angry or tender.  For some time he stood in silence considering whethe
r he should follow him or go away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded. "
And I know that this is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply and rode back to Gork
i.  On reentering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he could not slee
p.  He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in his imagination. On one 
of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly recalled an evening in Petersburg.
 Natasha with animated and excited face was telling him how she had gone to look 
for mushrooms the previous summer and had lost her way in the big forest. She inc
oherently described the depths of the forest, her feelings, and a talk with a bee
keeper she met, and constantly interrupted her story to say "No, I can't! I'm not
 telling it right no, you don't understand," though he encouraged her by saying t
hat he did understand, and he really had understood all she wanted to say. But Na
tasha was not satisfied with her own words she felt that they did not convey the 
passionately poetic feeling she had experienced that day and wished to convey. "H
e was such a delightful old man, and it was so dark in the forest... and he had s
uch kind... No, I can't describe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince A
ndrew smiled now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. "
I understood her," he thought. "I not only understood her, but it was just that i
nner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of soulthat very soul of he
rs which seemed to be fettered by her bodyit was that soul I loved in her... love
d so strongly and happily..." and suddenly he remembered how his love had ended. 
"He did not need anything of that kind. He neither saw nor understood anything of
 the sort. He only saw in her a pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did not
 deign to unite his fate. And I?... and he is still alive and gay!"  Prince Andre
w jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again began pacing up and down in f
ront of the shed.      CHAPTER XXVI   On August 25, the eve of the battle of Boro
dino, M. de Beausset, prefect of the French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon
's quarters at Valuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter
 from Madrid.  Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had bro
ught for the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the first compartment o
f Napoleon's tent, where he began opening the box while conversing with Napoleon'
s aidesdecamp who surrounded him.  Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at th
e entrance talking to some generals of his acquaintance.  The Emperor Napoleon ha
d not yet left his bedroom and was finishing his toilet. Slightly snorting and gr
unting, he presented now his back and now his plump hairy chest to the brush with
 which his valet was rubbing him down. Another valet, with his finger over the mo
uth of a bottle, was sprinkling Eau de Cologne on the Emperor's pampered body wit
h an expression which seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much Eau de 
Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon's short hair was wet and matted on the fore
head, but his face, though puffy and yellow, expressed physical satisfaction. "Go
 on, harder, go on!" he muttered to the valet who was rubbing him, slightly twitc
hing and grunting. An aidedecamp, who had entered the bedroom to report to the Em
peror the number of prisoners taken in yesterday's action, was standing by the do
or after delivering his message, awaiting permission to withdraw. Napoleon, frown
ing, looked at him from under his brows.  "No prisoners!" said he, repeating the 
aidedecamp's words. "They are forcing us to exterminate them. So much the worse f
or the Russian army.... Go on... harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching his back 
and presenting his fat shoulders.  "All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, an
d Fabvier too," he said, nodding to the aidedecamp.  "Yes, sire," and the aidedec
amp disappeared through the door of the tent.  Two valets rapidly dressed His Maj
esty, and wearing the blue uniform of the Guards he went with firm quick steps to
 the reception room.  De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging
 the present he had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of 
the entrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpected rapidity
 that he had not time to finish arranging the surprise.  Napoleon noticed at once
 what they were about and guessed that they were not ready. He did not wish to de
prive them of the pleasure of giving him a surprise, so he pretended not to see d
e Beausset and called Fabvier to him, listening silently and with a stern frown t
o what Fabvier told him of the heroism and devotion of his troops fighting at Sal
amanca, at the other end of Europe, with but one thoughtto be worthy of their Emp
erorand but one fearto fail to please him. The result of that battle had been dep
lorable. Napoleon made ironic remarks during Fabvier's account, as if he had not 
expected that matters could go otherwise in his absence.  "I must make up for tha
t in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see you later," he added, and summoned de Beau
sset, who by that time had prepared the surprise, having placed something on the 
chairs and covered it with a cloth.  De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly Fre
nch bow which only the old retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approa
ched him, presenting an envelope.  Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ea
r.  "You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?" he asked
, suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most cordial tone.  "Sire, 
all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as was proper.  But though N
apoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of this kind, and though in hi
s lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he was pleased to hear it from him. Again 
he honored him by touching his ear.  "I am very sorry to have made you travel so 
far," said he.  "Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of M
oscow," replied de Beausset.  Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absentmindedl
y, glanced to the right. An aidedecamp approached with gliding steps and offered 
him a gold snuffbox, which he took.  "Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he s
aid, raising the open snuffbox to his nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three
 days you will see Moscow. You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital.
 You will have a pleasant journey."  De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard 
for his taste for travel of which he had not till then been aware.  "Ha, what's t
his?" asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiers were looking at something c
oncealed under a cloth.  With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and with
out turning his back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at
 the same time, and said  "A present to Your Majesty from the Empress."  It was a
 portrait, painted in bright colors by Gerard, of the son borne to Napoleon by th
e daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for some reason everyone calle
d "The King of Rome."  A very pretty curlyheaded boy with a look of the Christ in
 the Sistine Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ball represented
 the terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter.  Though it was 
not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting the socalled King of Rome
 spiking the earth with a stick, the allegory apparently seemed to Napoleon, as i
t had done to all who had seen it in Paris, quite clear and very pleasing.  "The 
King of Rome!" he said, pointing to the portrait with a graceful gesture. "Admira
ble!"  With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of his
 face at will, he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look of pensive tende
rness. He felt that what he now said and did would be historical, and it seemed t
o him that it would now be best for himwhose grandeur enabled his son to play sti
ck and ball with the terrestrial globeto show, in contrast to that grandeur, the 
simplest paternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, he moved forward, glanced round 
at a chair which seemed to place itself under him, and sat down on it before the 
portrait. At a single gesture from him everyone went out on tiptoe, leaving the g
reat man to himself and his emotion.  Having sat still for a while he touchedhims
elf not knowing whythe thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the 
portrait, rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. He ordered the 
portrait to be carried outside his tent, that the Old Guard, stationed round it, 
might not be deprived of the pleasure of seeing the King of Rome, the son and hei
r of their adored monarch.  And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of br
eakfasting with him, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries
 of the officers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait.  "V
ive l'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l'Empereur!" came those ecstatic cries.
  After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his order of the da
y to the army.  "Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over the proc
lamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections. It ran   Soldier
s! This is the battle you have so longed for. Victory depends on you. It is essen
tial for us it will give us all we need comfortable quarters and a speedy return 
to our country. Behave as you did at Austerlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Smolensk
. Let our remotest posterity recall your achievements this day with pride. Let it
 be said of each of you "He was in the great battle before Moscow!"   "Before Mos
cow!" repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, who was so fond of travel, 
to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tent to where the horses stood s
addled.  "Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation to acc
ompany the Emperor he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride and was afraid of
 doing so.  But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. Wh
en Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his son's port
rait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.  "Take him away!" he said, pointing wit
h a gracefully majestic gesture to the portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a
 field of battle."  De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deepl
y, to indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor's words.    
  CHAPTER XXVII   On the twentyfifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napole
on spent the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering plans su
bmitted to him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to his generals.  
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha had been dislocat
ed by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the twentyfourth, and part of the 
linethe left flankhad been drawn back. That part of the line was not entrenched a
nd in front of it the ground was more open and level than elsewhere. It was evide
nt to anyone, military or not, that it was here the French should attack. It woul
d seem that not much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion, nor any p
articular care or trouble on the part of the Emperor and his marshals, nor was th
ere any need of that special and supreme quality called genius that people are so
 apt to ascribe to Napoleon yet the historians who described the event later and 
the men who then surrounded Napoleon, and he himself, thought otherwise.  Napoleo
n rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound air and in silenc
e, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously, and without communicating to
 the generals around him the profound course of ideas which guided his decisions 
merely gave them his final conclusions in the form of commands. Having listened t
o a suggestion from Davout, who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turn the Russ
ian left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining why not. T
o a proposal made by General Campan who was to attack the fleches to lead his div
ision through the woods, Napoleon agreed, though the socalled Duke of Elchingen N
ey ventured to remark that a movement through the woods was dangerous and might d
isorder the division.  Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redou
bt, Napoleon pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two 
batteries should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russian entrenchments
, and the places where, in line with them, the field artillery should be placed. 
 After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, and the dispositi
ons for the battle were written down from his dictation.  These dispositions, of 
which the French historians write with enthusiasm and other historians with profo
und respect, were as follows   At dawn the two new batteries established during t
he night on the plain occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the oppo
sing batteries of the enemy.  At the same time the commander of the artillery of 
the 1st Corps, General Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and all 
the howitzers of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move forward, open fire, 
and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy's battery, against which will operate     
     24 guns of the artillery of the Guards         30 guns of Campan's division 
  and     8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions            in all 62 guns.  
 The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche, will place the 
howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on the flanks of the battery 
that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left, which will have forty guns in al
l directed against it.  General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advan
ce with all the howitzers of the Guard's artillery against either one or other of
 the entrenchments.  During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance throug
h the wood on the village and turn the enemy's position.  General Campan will mov
e through the wood to seize the first fortification.  After the advance has begun
 in this manner, orders will be given in accordance with the enemy's movements.  
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the right wing 
are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division and of the viceKing's division 
will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack commence on the right wing.  The vice
King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the sam
e heights as Morand's and Gibrard's divisions, which under his leadership will be
 directed against the redoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces.  Al
l this must be done in good order le tout se fera avec ordre et methode as far as
 possible retaining troops in reserve.  The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,  Septemb
er, 6, 1812.    These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if one al
lows oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius, rela
ted to Napoleon's orders to deal with four pointsfour different orders. Not one o
f these was, or could be, carried out.  In the disposition it is said first that 
the batteries placed on the spot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti an
d Fouche which were to come in line with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire
 and shower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts. This could not be done, a
s from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not carry to the Russia
n works, and those 102 guns shot into the air until the nearest commander, contra
ry to Napoleon's instructions, moved them forward.  The second order was that Pon
iatowski, moving to the village through the wood, should turn the Russian left fl
ank. This could not be done and was not done, because Poniatowski, advancing on t
he village through the wood, met Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not and
 did not turn the Russian position.  The third order was General Campan will move
 through the wood to seize the first fortification. General Campan's division did
 not seize the first fortification but was driven back, for on emerging from the 
wood it had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.  The fourth
 order was The viceKing will occupy the village Borodino and cross by its three b
ridges, advancing to the same heights as Morand's and Gdrard's divisions for whos
e movements no directions are given, which under his leadership will be directed 
against the redoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces.  As far as on
e can make out, not so much from this unintelligible sentence as from the attempt
s the viceKing made to execute the orders given him, he was to advance from the l
eft through Borodino to the redoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were
 to advance simultaneously from the front.  All this, like the other parts of the
 disposition, was not and could not be executed. After passing through Borodino t
he viceKing was driven back to the Kolocha and could get no farther while the div
isions of Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and th
e redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry a thing probably
 unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon. So not one of the orders in the disposi
tion was, or could be, executed. But in the disposition it is said that, after th
e fight has commenced in this manner, orders will be given in accordance with the
 enemy's movements, and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements w
ould be made by Napoleon during the battle. But this was not and could not be don
e, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, as appeared later, 
he could not know the course of the battle and not one of his orders during the f
ight could be executed.      CHAPTER XXVIII   Many historians say that the French
 did not win the battle of Borodino because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he h
ad not had a cold the orders he gave before and during the battle would have been
 still more full of genius and Russia would have been lost and the face of the wo
rld have been changed. To historians who believe that Russia was shaped by the wi
ll of one manPeter the Greatand that France from a republic became an empire and 
French armies went to Russia at the will of one manNapoleonto say that Russia rem
ained a power because Napoleon had a bad cold on the twentyfourth of August may s
eem logical and convincing.  If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight or no
t to fight the battle of Borodino, and if this or that other arrangement depended
 on his will, then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his will might
 have saved Russia, and consequently the valet who omitted to bring Napoleon his 
waterproof boots on the twentyfourth would have been the savior of Russia. Along 
that line of thought such a deduction is indubitable, as indubitable as the deduc
tion Voltaire made in jest without knowing what he was jesting at when he saw tha
t the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's stomach being deranged.
 But to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man, Peter
 I, or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia begun by the wil
l of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems not merely untrue and irrational, but
 contrary to all human reality. To the question of what causes historic events an
other answer presents itself, namely, that the course of human events is predeter
mined from on highdepends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part in
 the events, and that a Napoleon's influence on the course of these events is pur
ely external and fictitious.  Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose t
hat the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, though he g
ave the order for it and thought it was done as a result of that order and strang
e as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousand men at Borodino
 was not due to Napoleon's will, though he ordered the commencement and conduct o
f the battle and thought it was done because he ordered it strange as these suppo
sitions appear, yet human dignitywhich tells me that each of us is, if not more a
t least not less a man than the great Napoleondemands the acceptance of that solu
tion of the question, and historic investigation abundantly confirms it.  At the 
battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one. That was all done b
y the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who killed people.  The French soldiers w
ent to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodino not because of Napoleon's ord
ers but by their own volition. The whole armyFrench, Italian, German, Polish, and
 Dutchhungry, ragged, and weary of the campaign, felt at the sight of an army blo
cking their road to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleo
n then forbidden them to fight the Russians, they would have killed him and have 
proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable.  When they heard Napol
eon's proclamation offering them, as compensation for mutilation and death, the w
ords of posterity about their having been in the battle before Moscow, they cried
 "Vive l'Empereur!" just as they had cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at the sight of the
 portrait of the boy piercing the terrestrial globe with a toy stick, and just as
 they would have cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at any nonsense that might be told them
. There was nothing left for them to do but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and go to figh
t, in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow. So it was not because o
f Napoleon's commands that they killed their fellow men.  And it was not Napoleon
 who directed the course of the battle, for none of his orders were executed and 
during the battle he did not know what was going on before him. So the way in whi
ch these people killed one another was not decided by Napoleon's will but occurre
d independently of him, in accord with the will of hundreds of thousands of peopl
e who took part in the common action. It only seemed to Napoleon that it all took
 place by his will. And so the question whether he had or had not a cold has no m
ore historic interest than the cold of the least of the transport soldiers.  More
over, the assertion made by various writers that his cold was the cause of his di
spositions not being as well planned as on former occasions, and of his orders du
ring the battle not being as good as previously, is quite baseless, which again s
hows that Napoleon's cold on the twentysixth of August was unimportant.  The disp
ositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even better, than previous dis
positions by which he had won victories. His pseudoorders during the battle were 
also no worse than formerly, but much the same as usual. These dispositions and o
rders only seem worse than previous ones because the battle of Borodino was the f
irst Napoleon did not win. The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and or
ders seem very bad, and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks of im
portance, when they relate to a battle that has been lost, and the very worst dis
positions and orders seem very good, and serious people fill whole volumes to dem
onstrate their merits, when they relate to a battle that has been won.  The dispo
sitions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz were a model of perfec
tion for that kind of composition, but still they were criticizedcriticized for t
heir very perfection, for their excessive minuteness.  Napoleon at the battle of 
Borodino fulfilled his office as representative of authority as well as, and even
 better than, at other battles. He did nothing harmful to the progress of the bat
tle he inclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, did not co
ntradict himself, did not get frightened or run away from the field of battle, bu
t with his great tact and military experience carried out his role of appearing t
o command, calmly and with dignity.      CHAPTER XXIX   On returning from a secon
d inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked  "The chessmen are set up, the game 
will begin tomorrow!"  Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to
 talk to him about Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress' 
household, surprising the prefect by his memory of minute details relating to the
 court.  He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love of trav
el, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, selfconfident surgeon who knows his job 
does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apron while a patient is bein
g strapped to the operating table. "The matter is in my hands and is clear and de
finite in my head. When the time comes to set to work I shall do it as no one els
e could, but now I can jest, and the more I jest and the calmer I am the more tra
nquil and confident you ought to be, and the more amazed at my genius."  Having f
inished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest before the serious busin
ess which, he considered, awaited him next day. He was so much interested in that
 task that he was unable to sleep, and in spite of his cold which had grown worse
 from the dampness of the evening, he went into the large division of the tent at
 three o'clock in the morning, loudly blowing his nose. He asked whether the Russ
ians had not withdrawn, and was told that the enemy's fires were still in the sam
e places. He nodded approval.  The adjutant in attendance came into the tent.  "W
ell, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?" Napoleon asked him.  "W
ithout doubt, sire," replied Rapp.  Napoleon looked at him.  "Do you remember, si
re, what you did me the honor to say at Smolensk?" continued Rapp. "The wine is d
rawn and must be drunk."  Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning
 his head on his hand.  "This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. "It has diminishe
d greatly since Smolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always sai
d so and I am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, the Guards are in
tact?" he remarked interrogatively.  "Yes, sire," replied Rapp.  Napoleon took a 
lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch. He was not sleepy and it 
was still not nearly morning. It was impossible to give further orders for the sa
ke of killing time, for the orders had all been given and were now being executed
.  "Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of the Guards?" a
sked Napoleon sternly.  "Yes, sire."  "The rice too?"  Rapp replied that he had g
iven the Emperor's order about the rice, but Napoleon shook his head in dissatisf
action as if not believing that his order had been executed. An attendant came in
 with punch. Napoleon ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently 
sipped his own.  "I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, sniffing at his g
lass. "This cold is tiresome. They talk about medicinewhat is the good of medicin
e when it can't cure a cold! Corvisart gave me these lozenges but they don't help
 at all. What can doctors cure? One can't cure anything. Our body is a machine fo
r living. It is organized for that, it is its nature. Let life go on in it unhind
ered and let it defend itself, it will do more than if you paralyze it by encumbe
ring it with remedies. Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a cert
ain time the watchmaker cannot open it, he can only adjust it by fumbling, and th
at blindfold.... Yes, our body is just a machine for living, that is all."  And h
aving entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond, Napoleon suddenly 
and unexpectedly gave a new one.  "Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" aske
d he. "It is the art of being stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That's a
ll."  Rapp made no reply.  "Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Na
poleon. "We shall see! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three 
weeks and did not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... We shall se
e!"  He looked at his watch. It was still only four o'clock. He did not feel slee
py. The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do. He rose, walked to 
and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went out of the tent. The night wa
s dark and damp, a scarcely perceptible moisture was descending from above. Near 
by, the campfires were dimly burning among the French Guards, and in the distance
 those of the Russian line shone through the smoke. The weather was calm, and the
 rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to take up their
 positions were clearly audible.  Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, loo
ked at the fires and listened to these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guard
sman in a shaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawn him
self up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stopped in front of
 him.  "What year did you enter the service?" he asked with that affectation of m
ilitary bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed the soldiers.  The
 man answered the question.  "Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its 
rice?"  "It has, Your Majesty."  Napoleon nodded and walked away.   At halfpast f
ive Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.  It was growing light, the sky wa
s clearing, only a single cloud lay in the east. The abandoned campfires were bur
ning themselves out in the faint morning light.  On the right a single deep repor
t of a cannon resounded and died away in the prevailing silence. Some minutes pas
sed. A second and a third report shook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed 
solemnly near by on the right.  The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate
 before others rang out and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one 
another.  Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where he dism
ounted. The game had begun.      CHAPTER XXX   On returning to Gorki after having
 seen Prince Andrew, Pierre ordered his groom to get the horses ready and to call
 him early in the morning, and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in
 a corner Boris had given up to him.  Before he was thoroughly awake next morning
 everybody had already left the hut. The panes were rattling in the little window
s and his groom was shaking him.  "Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excelle
ncy!" he kept repeating pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder with
out looking at him, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.  "What
? Has it begun? Is it time?" Pierre asked, waking up.  "Hear the firing," said th
e groom, a discharged soldier. "All the gentlemen have gone out, and his Serene H
ighness himself rode past long ago."  Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the p
orch. Outside all was bright, fresh, dewy, and cheerful. The sun, just bursting f
orth from behind a cloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays still half
 broken by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the dewbesprinkl
ed dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on the windows, the fence, and o
n Pierre's horses standing before the hut. The roar of guns sounded more distinct
 outside. An adjutant accompanied by a Cossack passed by at a sharp trot.  "It's 
time, Count it's time!" cried the adjutant.  Telling the groom to follow him with
 the horses, Pierre went down the street to the knoll from which he had looked at
 the field of battle the day before. A crowd of military men was assembled there,
 members of the staff could be heard conversing in French, and Kutuzov's gray hea
d in a white cap with a red band was visible, his gray nape sunk between his shou
lders. He was looking through a field glass down the highroad before him.  Mounti
ng the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him, spellbound by be
auty. It was the same panorama he had admired from that spot the day before, but 
now the whole place was full of troops and covered by smoke clouds from the guns,
 and the slanting rays of the bright sun, rising slightly to the left behind Pier
re, cast upon it through the clear morning air penetrating streaks of rosy, golde
n tinted light and long dark shadows. The forest at the farthest extremity of the
 panorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowishgreen color its undu
lating outline was silhouetted against the horizon and was pierced beyond Valuevo
 by the Smolensk highroad crowded with troops. Nearer at hand glittered golden co
rnfields interspersed with copses. There were troops to be seen everywhere, in fr
ont and to the right and left. All this was vivid, majestic, and unexpected but w
hat impressed Pierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borod
ino and the hollows on both sides of the Kolocha.  Above the Kolocha, in Borodino
 and on both sides of it, especially to the left where the Voyna flowing between 
its marshy banks falls into the Kolocha, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, 
to dissolve, and to become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and magica
lly colored and outlined everything. The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist
, and over the whole expanse and through that mist the rays of the morning sun we
re reflected, flashing back like lightning from the water, from the dew, and from
 the bayonets of the troops crowded together by the riverbanks and in Borodino. A
 white church could be seen through the mist, and here and there the roofs of hut
s in Borodino as well as dense masses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests and
 ordnance. And all this moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke and mist spread ou
t over the whole space. Just as in the mistenveloped hollow near Borodino, so alo
ng the entire line outside and above it and especially in the woods and fields to
 t